<h2>I</h2>

<h3>OF THE LAND I LIVE IN</h3>

<p>It may be thought by some, who from prejudice or
ignorance are not in a position to judge properly of the
matter, that there is nothing in this part of England
which is worth writing of or describing, so strange are
the views held by outsiders of us Yorkshiremen, so
peculiar the ideas which many people have respecting
our land, people, and manners. There is an impression
beyond our borders that we are never so happy as when
engaged in a horse-dealing transaction, and it is quite
true that we are fond of trade in that direction, and
bad to overreach when it comes to a question of hard
bargaining. Nevertheless, it is not true that we think
of nothing else but horse-dealing, any more than that
our county⁠—or, at least, some parts of it⁠—is
not to be compared for natural beauties with other shires
which have achieved more fame in that way. I have heard
travelled men discourse of the fine scenery and beautiful
landscapes of Cumberland and Westmoreland, and of
the grandeur of Devon and Cornwall, not to speak of
Derbyshire and some parts of Wales, comparing divers
districts of these to the country in Switzerland and
Italy, which is, I understand, as fair as anything this
earth can show; but, in spite of that, it has always
seemed to me that our own three Ridings can exhibit as
many pleasing prospects as man need wish for; so that
a Yorkshireman casting his eyes upon them must needs
thank God that he has been placed to live his life
amongst such delectable spots. For we have hill and
valley, and broad tracts of luscious meadow-land where
you may feed a thousand head of cattle and never hurt
the luxuriance of the grass, and our rivers are comparable
for quiet beauty with Trent or Severn, and our
rocky defiles are oftentimes as wild as anything that you
will meet in Scotland or Cumberland. Then, again, our
seaboard is such as few countries can show the like of,
consisting as it does of rough promontory and rocky
headland, joined with long stretches of brown sand,
across which the North Sea’s waves come tumbling cold
and icy from Norroway. Nay, when I begin to think in
good earnest of the matter, and to remember what I
have seen in other days⁠—for I have travelled somewhat
myself⁠—I am certain that for diversity of scenery you
may roam the wide world over and never find a country
so fair, so rich in Nature’s gifts, so pleasing to the
eye, as my native Yorkshire.</p>

<p>And of all parts of this broad-acred land there is
none which I so much love or admire as that in which
the greater portion of my life hath been spent, though
I indeed have seen the whole of the three Ridings, from
Cronkley Fell to Featherbed Moss, and from Flamborough
Head to Bowland Forest. There is a fine beauty
about the dales of the North Riding, and I have seen
sights upon the lonely wolds of Cleveland and Ryedale
which did inspire me with feelings of awe and great
wonder. And I have heard artists who understood these
matters say that amongst those dales and hills there are
scenes which not all the world can show the equal of.
Howbeit I am no artist, though loving a good picture,
but only a simple yeoman born and bred on the land,
and never so happy as when breathing in the fresh air
of a spring morning as it steals to your nostrils over the
breadth of a new-ploughed field; and so, when it comes
to a question of comparison between these districts, I
give the palm to the broad meadow-lands and deep woods
and gentle undulations of that corner of the West Riding
where first I saw the light, where I have passed the
greater part of my life to this present time, where,
please God, I shall die and lie at peace.</p>

<p>If you will take your chart of Yorkshire and draw with
your pen a straight line from Doncaster to Wakefield,
from Wakefield to Wetherby, from Wetherby to York,
from York to Goole, and from Goole to Doncaster again,
you will have enclosed the tract of land of which I have
spoken. I question if you can find throughout the
length and breadth of England a similar piece of country
more rich in historical associations, more odorous of
national life, more beautiful in its own quiet way. Here
we have no great mountains, no rushing rivers, no
awesome valleys, but the land rolls along in richness of
wood and stream, thorpe and hamlet, the gray spires
and towers of village churches rising heavenward here
and there, the red roofs of farmsteads, the tall gables of
manors and halls peeping from the great groves of elm
and beech and chestnut which stud the land everywhere
in prodigal luxuriance. Right through this land runs
the Great North Road like a silver streak, straight and
direct, so that as I stand at my door o’ nights I can hear
the carriers’ waggons rumbling north and south, and
the quick gallop of horses hurried on by post-boys fearful
of highwayman and footpad, of whom in this year
of grace, 1686, there are still many left amongst us.
Branching from this noble highway go roads right and
left, making communications between our villages and
market-towns easy, and being in a general way of speaking
well kept. Right merry market-towns, too, are they
of which I speak, and not to be put down by any of
their fellows in England. For there is merrie
Wakefield, with its bridge and chapel, where battles have
been fought, and a king’s son foully slain, and where in
old times bows were made of right good Yorkshire ash
or willow; and there is Pontefract with its great castle,
now falling into ruins, and its mighty Church of All
Saints, and half a score of ancient religious houses;
and there is Selby, with its glorious Abbey, whose towers
and pinnacles you may see for many a square mile round
about; and there is Wetherby, and Snaith, and Sherburn,
and Thorne, each a fair market-town; and there
is Goole, whence along the Ouse and Humber go ships
even to the ports of Holland; and at the southern point
there is Doncaster, breathing the air and spirit of English
freedom; and at the northern there is York, the proud
and beautiful city, whose great Minster looks forth across
the embattled walls upon the broad lands beyond, like a
fair mother watching her children. And between these
market-towns, fenced in by wood and stream and
meadow, and embowered in leafy hedgerows, stands
many a smiling village and hamlet, with its old church
and great manor or castle standing in the midst of
broad parks and pleasaunces. Here and there, too, you
may come across some homestead standing alone in its
meadows and closes, and yet never so far from a village
that its occupants are entirely neighbourless. A fair
land and a rich it is, and dear to me, as I have already
said, because it bore and nursed me, and has smiled
upon me, year in, year out, when human eyes did not
smile, comforting me by its very beauty when life seemed
dark and inexplicable.</p>

<p>It was within four miles of the ancient and historic
market-town of Pontefract, where kings have been
imprisoned and done to death, that I, William Dale,
yeoman, was born in the year of grace 1621. The house
wherein I first drew breath is that in which I now live;
I trust in God it may shelter me to the end, and my
children and grand-children after me, for a right good
house of stone it is, and was new tiled the year I came
to man’s estate, by Geoffrey Scholes, the mason, of
Campsall, who did good and honest work in whatsoever
he undertook. As for situation, it lieth somewhat
lonely, but at a good altitude, and the air round about
it is exceedingly clear and pleasant to breathe. It
stands on the left-hand side of the highway as you go
from Doncaster to Ferrybridge, and is distant exactly
one and a half miles from the cross-roads at Darrington
and about three-quarters of a mile from Wentbridge.
There is no house stands near it⁠—save one or two
cottages that I builded for convenience’ sake, it being
somewhat of a long way for the men to walk from the
neighbouring villages, and the road nothing like safe o’
dark nights⁠—nevertheless, we have never felt afraid of
harm, albeit we were visited more than once in the
troublous times by robbers, who thought to take
advantage of our lonely position. However, they were but
ill-requited for their pains, two of the rascals carrying
away nothing better than a charge of lead in their
persons, and the third being shot stone dead by my
cowherd, Jacob Trusty, as he was striving to make
forcible entry into the pantry window. Yet lonely
indeed is the situation of Dale’s Field, and some more
used to company might fear the long winter evenings
which we spend here. No feeling of this sort ever came
over myself, who knew that all around me lay my own
good land, nigh four hundred acres of it, grass and
arable, of which my fathers had reaped the harvest for
many a generation. Dales of Dale’s Field there have
always been since William the Conqueror came over;
God knows whether there always will be, for I have
seen ancient families dwindle away and vanish root and
branch, so that even my own good old stock may possibly
in time die out, and our homestead vanish from the face
of the earth, and our acres, for which we have more than
once stood much hard contest, even to blood-shedding, be
swallowed up in the estates around them.{{FN1}}</p>

<p>{FN1} William Dale’s fears on this ground were ultimately
realized. There is now no trace of house or farmstead on
the spot where he and his forefathers lived, and their
acres are swallowed up in the neighbouring estates.
Nevertheless, so strongly do old associations cling
to the soil which reared them, that the meadows and
closesthere are called Dale’s Fields to this day.</p>

<p>I have said that Dale’s Field stands at a good altitude,
which is indeed a grateful truth. For standing at my
door of a clear evening, and looking east and north-east,
I can behold the two great hills rising up near Selby,
the one called Hambleton Haugh, the other Brayton
Barugh, and beyond them the long nave and high tower
of Selby Abbey itself. Between me and them stretches
a wide country of wood and meadow, which I am never
tired of gazing upon in the summer evenings when I sit
in my window with pipe and glass. For it seems to
smile and smile and smile, and the green of the woods
blends with the brown of the soil, and the clear blue
overhead looks down on both with a smile of benediction.
Somewhat of a flat land it is, that country due east, but
none the less fair, seeing that it holdeth many a fair
village, whose spires shoot upwards out of the green
and stand clearly defined against the sky. To the
northward, too, we can see a fair distance, where the
high ground rises beyond Ferrybridge and Brotherton,
over whose slopes the road climbs on its way to York.
A prospect of this sort is always most grateful to us who
are born on the soil, and more to be preferred, because
of its peaceful character and gentle undulations, than
the bolder scenery which you will find in our northern
dales. Nevertheless, if I am minded to look upon more
diversified prospects, I am not far removed from such,
for across my home meadows lies the Vale of Went,
than which I never saw aught more picturesque in all
our land. A beautiful valley and a charming it is,
as you would say did you but enter it at Church
Smeaton, or even further east, and follow it to the
hamlet of Wentbridge, where it widens and spreads itself
out in the broad meadow-lands that stretch at the foot
of the long rise of ground called Went Hill. Along this
valley is much diversity of scenery, for sometimes the
sides slope gently towards each other, and sometimes
they are dark and rocky and frown with beetling masses
of gray crag, and here and there are wild and barren,
and in other places they are covered with luxuriant
woods and groves of fir and pine. Nought fairer than
Went Vale have I ever seen, especially as it presents
itself in the early days of June, when all the trees are in
leaf and the birds sing, sing, sing from morning till
night, and the little stream of Went runs babbling
along to join the Don some twenty miles away. Many
a twist and turn does Went make as it flows through the
valley. Now it is straight and placid, as between the
mill-house and the bridge, and anon it winds in and out
in capricious fashion, so that there is one spot where I
have often stood and hurled a stone that crossed the
stream five times in the one throw. Wealth, too, it
hath of birds’-nests, and many a time have I tumbled
down its rough and gnarly crags or from the yielding
branches of its trees when hunting for the haunts of
magpie and jackdaw, thrush and blackbird.</p>

<p>If you will look at your chart again you will find that
my farmstead of Dale’s Field is removed but little space
from the head of Went Hill. How many times have I
stood there in the early morning, when the valley
beneath was full of mist, the long banks of which
dispersed as the sun rose and shone upon the land! A
fair prospect it is from Went Hill top, for in the wide
valley beneath lie villages and hamlets and manors that
relieve the eye from the long stretches of brown and
green. Across the vale rises Upton Beacon, where they
lighted the great bonfire when the Spanish Armada
came to attack us. Beneath it lies the hamlet of
Thorpe, and a mile away the square tower of Badsworth
Church rises from the thick woods that shut that village
in. Further away, in the direction of Wakefield, lie
Nostell and Wragby and Hemsworth, and many another
fair village, and nearer at hand, to the northward, stand
Ackworth and East Hardwick. Right at the head of
the valley, and just peeping round the corner of the hill,
is the village of Carleton, where for a brief season slept
Oliver Cromwell and General Fairfax during the time of
the siege of Pontefract Castle. And beyond Carleton,
situate on high ground that shuts in the head of the
valley like an amphitheatre, is Pontefract itself, its
Church of St. Giles, in the market-place, standing out
bold and distinct against the sky.</p>

<p>Now, to stand upon the summit of Went Hill and
behold the prospect from thence is always a pleasant
matter, for there is the land to look upon, and the
villages, and the meadows are full of grazing cattle, and
the sheep are feeding busily adown the hillside, and
there is a manner of thanksgiving in the air which did
always affect my heart mightily, though why it should
do so I know not, having never in my life been given to
rhyming or reading of rhymes, save only Mr. William
Shakspere’s folio of plays which my father did buy in
York when I was but a lad. But of a Sunday evening
when, the light lasting till a late hour, they did use to
sing Evensong in the parish churches at six instead of
three, as in winter and autumn, I have often stood there
with bowed and bared head listening reverently to the
bells which sounded from all sides of me. Far across
the valley were the bells of Pontefract and Ackworth
and Badsworth, ringing out their peal with regular
swing, and the bells of Darrington sounded over the
hilltop, and those of Womersley sent their sound across
the level land, and sometimes in the deep silence that
followed when these were still, I caught the last faint
tinkle of the bells of Smeaton making music across the
woods and meadows. A beautiful and a holy sound it
was, and raised in me a solemn feeling which not all the
exhortations of Master Drumbleforth, our parson, could
ever produce, though he indeed at one time did talk
much and long to me of my soul’s health, when it
seemed as if my condition needed it.</p>

<p>It is amidst these scenes that my life hath been spent,
and it is from them that what I have to tell must gain
interest, if interest there can be in a plain chronicle of
the doings of a simple farmer, whose lot it has been to
live in somewhat troublous times and be dragged into
the concerns thereof sorely against his will. It would
best have suited me, as it suited my fathers before me,
to have lived my life on the land undisturbed, to have
had no greater matters to think of than the ploughing of
the twelve-acre or the sowing of early wheat, to have
taken no further journey than to York or Doncaster, and
to have been free from affairs of State and difficulties
of lawyers’ making. Howbeit, Providence, which hath
many things to provide for, ordained that my life for
awhile was to be neither quiet nor ordinary, and did
hustle and bustle me hither and thither like one of my
own haycocks in a gale of wind. For in my earlier days
I saw what no honest Englishman cares to see, namely,
the country divided against itself, Englishman fighting
with Englishman, Parliament against the Monarchy, so
that oftentimes father fought against son, and brother
with brother, and the land was alive with Roundheads
and Cavaliers, and peaceable citizens knew not what to
make of things, and battles were fought, and the throne
pulled down, and they laid siege to Pontefract Castle
and dismantled it, and cut off the king’s head before
his own palace of Whitehall, at which sad business
I, William Dale, was present, and have to this day a
memento of, to wit, a kerchief steeped in his Majesty’s
blood. And in these declining years of my life⁠—though
I am, thank God, as hale and hearty a man as
you will find in the three Ridings⁠—I am minded, chiefly
through the persuasions of my daughter Dorothy, who is
fond of her book, to write down with such small skill as
I have or she can lend me, somewhat concerning my
adventures in those evil days that came upon us in the
middle of this present century.</p>

<h2>II</h2>

<h3>OF MY FAMILY, FRIENDS, NEIGHBOURS, AND ENEMIES</h3>

<p>It would appear most fitting to the proper usages that,
before going further, I should tell you something about
our family and the mode of life we kept in my younger
days, and also some particulars of our neighbours and
friends, and likewise of our enemies, of whom you will
hear no little before this history closes. And to begin
with my own family first⁠—we Dales are of an ancient
race, and have lived at Dale’s Field certainly since the
time of the Conquest, and, I doubt not, even before that.
That we are proud of our ancient birth and of the fact
that age after age we have tilled our own land, goes
without saying. It is, I think, an innocent pride, and
not of the nature of that vainglory which we are commanded
as good Christians to eschew.</p>

<p>There were four of us in family at Dale’s Field: my
father, John Dale; my mother, Susannah Dale; my
sister Lucy, and myself. To speak of my father first.
He was a great man, a man of tall stature and broad
shoulders, and his face was of the colour of a rising
sun, red and healthy, and tanned with exposure to wind
and rain and summer heat. A right hearty man he was,
and was never known to refuse his meals. A healthy
appetite, indeed, he always had, as most men have who,
like him, are out of their beds and about their business
ere ever Sol hath risen from the eastern horizon. Up
and about was he at five in summer and six in winter,
and would roundly rate any man that came to stall or
stable a minute later than those hours. For he himself
was abed by nine o’ the clock, and could not understand
why a man wanted more than eight hours’ sleep. Once
up, he would bustle about from stable to mistal, from
barn to rickyard, urging on his men with cheery voice or
honest scolding⁠—for he was a scrupulously fair master,
and praised or blamed as need arose⁠—and seeing the
day’s labour fairly commenced, until half-past seven,
when breakfast was served in our great kitchen, and
master and men sat down together. A custom, indeed,
it hath always been in our family, and one which I
have religiously preserved, for all under the roof to eat
together, according to their various station of life. Thus
my father and mother sat at a cross-table with Lucy and
myself, and the men were placed in order at long tables
set out on either side of the great kitchen. Nor did the
meat served at our table differ from that served at our
servants’, for it was my father’s opinion that master
and man, who shared the toils of the land, should also
share the produce thereof, wherefore no man of ours
was ever stinted of beef or beer or bread.</p>

<p>My father’s mode of life was as simple and regular
as well could be. After breakfast⁠—whereat he always
drank no more than a quart of small ale, holding that
no one should drink much liquor before noon⁠—he went
forth to ride round his fields, mounted on a little white
mare named Dumpling, which was an animal of exceeding
strength though low stature. How many miles he
had ridden upon Dumpling, I know not; yet Jack
Drumbleforth, our parson’s son, did once compute it at
some thousands. Nor was Jack far out in his reckoning,
for my father and Dumpling were used to turn out of
the yard as the kitchen clock struck nine, and did not
appear again until noon, the intervening hours being
passed in riding up one field and down another, or in
cantering along the road to Darrington to give an order
to blacksmith or carpenter. After dinner in the great
kitchen, my father would smoke a pipe in my mother’s
parlour, and drink a glass of strong waters, and maybe
fall asleep for the space of half an hour, after which he
would arise and shake himself, and go forth and mount
Dumpling once more and ride out amongst his men.
And at supper-time he would talk to my mother of the
day’s doings and the weather, and would then smoke
more tobacco⁠—which habit was then becoming
popular⁠—and drink ale out of his own silver flagon,
and at nine o’clock would lock up his house and go to bed,
where he slept, as he himself hath often said, without
dream or even turning over, until the cocks began to
crow in the yard outside.</p>

<p>Upon Saturdays it was my father’s custom, having
eaten a larger breakfast than usual, to attire himself in
his second-best suit of clothes, and make ready to ride
into Pontefract market. There were times when my
mother went with him, and then the light cart was
brought out of the shed, and Dobbin, the brown horse,
harnessed in the shafts, for Dumpling would never abide
other gear than a saddle. When my father went alone,
however, Dumpling was extra well groomed, and wore
the new bridle and stirrups, and the two departed about
ten o’clock, my father carrying little bags of wheat or
barley samples in his pockets, to show to them that
dealt in such matters. Other produce which went to
market, or stock like cattle or sheep, was taken thither
by Jacob Trusty or Timothy Grass earlier in the morning.
All day long would my father remain at market,
dining at the farmers’ ordinary, and when business was
done remaining an hour longer to drink with his friends
and acquaintance. Nevertheless, he always strove to
arrive at his home ere night fell, for the road was here
and there of a lonely nature, and there were dangerous
characters abroad.</p>

<p>Once, indeed, coming home from Pontefract market,
my father did light upon an adventure which had been
like to put an end to him for ever. It chanced that
Jacob Trusty, our cowherd, had that day driven
four-and-twenty young beasts to market, and there my father
speedily sold them to Richard Myles, the butcher, who
paid him for the same openly in the street. And as they
were counting the money my father took notice of two
evil-looking men, habited like north-country cattle-drovers,
who hung about in the crowd and cast longing
glances at Dick Myles’s bag of money. Howbeit, he lost
sight of them and thought no more upon the matter.
But riding homewards, between the cross-roads at
Darrington and Dale’s Field, and being come to the
great plantation which occurs ’twixt the milestones, two
men mounted did suddenly ride out of the trees, and
commanded him to halt and deliver. Whereupon,
Dumpling, responding, shot out like an arrow and flew
homewards, and my father, bending low over her
shoulders, heard two bullets whistle above his head.
And the men following hard, it became a question
whether or not they would come up to him before Dale’s
Field was reached. More than one shot did they fire,
but Dumpling galloped fast, and outstripped the taller
brutes ridden by the highwaymen. But when the yard
gate was reached the pursuers were almost upon them,
and if it had not been that my mother heard the unwonted
clatter of Dumpling’s feet, my father had been
slain at his own door. Howbeit, she, hearing the
commotion, opened the house-door, and my father leaping
off, entered, bringing Dumpling with him, and barred
the door behind them. And while Dumpling and my
mother, the one trembling and all of a lather, and the
other frightened and fearful, stood in the great kitchen,
my father took down his fowling-piece and ran upstairs,
and there from a little window did let fly at the men to
such purpose that one of them screamed and reeled, and
both rode off as hard as their brutes could carry them.
And the next morning there was blood on the paving of
the yard, so that we judged that the villains had received
more than they ever wished to have.</p>

<p>As for my mother, Susannah Dale, she was the
daughter of Master Richard Challoner, the corn-miller
of Ackworth, who left her a tidy portion at his death.
She was a tall, fine woman, well suited to marry such a
man as my father, of whom, indeed, she cherished a
great affection, as he did of her, both thinking there was
no such husband or wife in all the land. A capital
housewife she was, and had a manner of preserving
plums which was famous for twenty miles around, so
that it became usual to say of a fresh-looking old man
or woman that he or she was as well conserved as
Mistress Dale’s damsons. For the other matters which
appertain to good housewifery she had a natural turn,
and found great occasion of delight in curing hams and
flitches, and rearing poultry of various sorts, in making
up butter into curious devices, and in seeing that the
apples, pears, plums, apricots, and gooseberries were
properly attended to. There was never a weed in the
kitchen garden, and she would never have slept at night
if she had not previously seen with her own eyes that
the hen-roost and pigeon-cote were secured from the
foxes, who are always prowling round to see what they
can pick up. Nor was there ever a weakly calf that she
did not nurture with new milk, feeding it with spoon or
quill until it seemed likely to do for itself. As for
sewing, and mending, and making of new garments, she was
indefatigable at it, and had always her knitting in her
hand as she sat by the wood fire in her parlour, which
was an exceeding pleasant apartment where all the conserves
were kept, and the white table-linen and napery,
of which she had much store, and the six silver forks
given to her by her father at her marriage, with other
matters, over which she loved to keep a vigilant watch.
Also in that chamber there was a deep window-seat,
filled with plants in scarlet-coloured pots, which she
watered and tended every morning. And over against
my mother’s chair, in which no one else ever sat, there
was fixed an oaken shelf, made by our carpenter, which
held certain books, her own property, out of which she
read much. There was the Bishop’s Bible, and King
James’s Bible, which they had just begun to sell, and
there was Mr. Francis Quarles’ <em>Pentalogia, or the
Quintessence of Meditation</em>, and Raphael Holinshed’s
<em>Chronicle</em>, and <em>Purchas, his Pilgrimage</em>, and
Pattenham’s <em>Art of English Poesie</em>, and the <em>Compleat
Farrier</em>, out of which my mother was wont to read a
cure for horse or cow temporarily afflicted, and there
was Mr. William Shakspere’s Plays, and Master
Latimer’s <em>Sermons on the Ploughers</em>, and various
others, all of which she read, being a great scholar in
her way. But my father read little, save a chapter in
the Bible every Sunday night; nevertheless, he was a
great admirer of my mother’s learning, and did often
say that there was no clerk in the archdiocese of York
who knew more of book-craft than she did. And, indeed,
she did often divert us in the long winter evenings
by reading to us out of Mr. Shakspere’s folio, which
she accomplished in a manner so remarkable that we
were moved to tears or laughter as the case might be,
over the woes or humours of Hamlet and Ophelia,
Romeo and Juliet, Sir John Falstaff and Mrs. Page.
At these times my father would get so interested that he
would conceive the matter to be real, and if there came
a fight or an argument would shout forth his counsel to
the side he favoured.</p>

<p>Although our situation at Dale’s Field was somewhat
lonely and retired, we were not without company. For
the village of Darrington, as I have already told you, lieth
but a mile and three-quarters along the highway, and to
Darrington Church we were accustomed to proceed every
Sunday morning, wet or fine, hot or cold, throughout the
year, my father holding that attendance upon Divine service
was good preparation for the coming week. A pleasant
walk indeed it was in summer, between the tall hedgerows
and under the shadow of the ancient trees that line
the roadside, and we were accustomed to look forward to
it. Upon reaching the village we were used to meet
with a stream of villagers going churchwards, with some
of whom, our acquaintances, we fell in, discoursing of
various matters until we came to the churchyard, where
the people always fell into groups to wait the arrival of
the vicar. A pretty sight it was the old, worn church
in the background, the groups of boys round the ancient
sundial over against the porch, the farmers in their best,
chatting soberly about the harvest prospects, their wives
discoursing domestic affairs, the young maidens, very
gay as to their garments, smiling and whispering amongst
themselves, and the young men eyeing the maidens.
Then there were old men and old women, who came
slowly up the paths and blessed everybody they spoke
to, and somewhere about the porch hovered the parish
constable, with his appurtenances of office, striking terror
into the hearts of all who were naughtily disposed.
And high above these groups sounded the music of the
bells, of which there are three. These, we always
thought, did use to say, “Come to church, come to
church, come to church,” but Jacob Trusty, our cowherd,
said that they inquired, “Who beats us, who beats us,
who beats us?” However, they made fine jangling
music, and could be heard right away at Dale’s Field,
ere ever we set out down the road.</p>

<p>At five minutes to eleven two of the bells ceased ringing,
and the third rang all alone until the hour. Then
did late-comers, hearing the solitary bell, hurry their
movements, and then did the Reverend Nathaniel
Drumbleforth, our parson, come through the vicarage
garden and approach the churchyard. A fine figure, too,
he made of a Sunday morning, being habited in cassock,
and gown, and bands, and wearing his best silver buckles
and four-cornered cap, and the bow he would make to
the assembled groups, as he passed between them, was
as fine as anything you can see at court. To be sure,
he was a college man, and had much learning, and had,
it was even said, once written a learned work, so that it
was only likely he should excel in courtliness. And
when he had greeted us all and we him, he led the way
into church and put his surplice on, and went into the
reading-desk, and Thomas Cludde, the sexton, made
ready to give due answer, and the bell ceased ringing
above, and the service began with “Rend your hearts
and not your garments.”</p>

<p>As for myself, in my younger days I was chiefly
occupied during the time of Divine service in thinking
about other matters. For there were matters which
did more easily claim a lad’s attention than the reading
and discoursing of Parson Drumbleforth, such as the
performance of the village musicians, who sat in the
chancel and played hymn tunes, and the flying about of
the swallows and sparrows, who came in through the
open windows and twittered in the beams overhead.
Likewise, in summer and spring, there came to our ears
from the meadows outside the humming of bees and
countless insects, who were flitting from flower to flower,
mingled with the lowing of cattle and occasional neighing
of horses. These things necessarily distracted my
attention⁠—to wit, I used to wonder if there were eggs
or fledglings in the swallow’s nest which I could see
under the arch of the chancel, or if the sparrows were
still building in the tower, or if that were Farmer
Denby’s roan cow that mooed so loudly under the
western window. To the musicians I gave great heed,
for their performance was considered very fine. There
was amongst them a violin, first and second, and a
double bass, a couple of flutes, and a serpent, and when
they were minded to exert themselves they made a brave
show, and the hymns went trippingly.</p>

<p>When Parson Drumbleforth ascended the pulpit and
gave forth his text, our churchwardens were used to take
up their rods of office and leave the church for a visit
to the two ale-houses. This indeed is a time-honoured
observance, and one that no churchwarden worthy the
name will ever forego. For the churchwarden, bearing
in mind that every able-bodied man should, in duty to
God and the king, present himself at Divine office,
must, when sermon begins, assume his rod and go forth
to see that no idler tarrieth drinking and carousing in
the taverns. It hath been said by persons of a suspicious
nature that the wardens are not above taking a mug of
small ale themselves when on these visits, but that is
neither here nor there, for their vocation is one of much
arduous duty, and small ale hurteth no man. However,
when they have visited the inns and haled forth any
that linger there, they return to the church, where the
parson is just finishing his discourse, and do assist, if
need be, in whatever matter is to be attended to.</p>

<p>Very often, upon a Sunday, one or other of our neighbours
at Darrington would accompany us home to Dale’s
Field, and share our dinner, remaining afterwards to
smoke a pipe of tobacco with my father. And about
once a week came Parson Drumbleforth to sup with us,
and discourse upon the crops and news from London,
which were great occasions, and served to relieve the
monotony in which we had otherwise lived. Then, too,
there were always farmers, or drovers, or cattle-dealers
upon the road, and these would come in for half an hour
and refresh themselves, so that we were not without
news of the great world, which was also communicated
to us by the passing coaches, post-chaises, and chariots
continually hastening to or from London and York.
Now and then my mother would take Lucy and myself,
and pay a visit of ceremony to some farmer’s wife at
Darrington or Wentbridge, upon which occasions we
were used to play with the children of the house, and
explore their orchards and gardens, and buildings,
though we never saw any so good as our own at Dale’s
Field.</p>

<p>As for enemies, we had none save the Watsons of
Castle Hill, who were yeomen like ourselves, and had
been on the land and in deadly feud with the Dales for
many a century. Never did a Dale speak to a Watson
unless provoked thereto by anger or wrong done, and
then the word was as oft as not accompanied by a blow.
And the cause of dispute was this⁠—between our land
and that of the Watsons lay a broad strip of moorland,
over which each family claimed a right, to the exclusion
of the other. When, as often happened for years,
neither house strove to take possession of the debatable
piece of ground, matters were quiet between them, but
when one drove thereon a herd of cattle or flock of
sheep, then arose a conflict and hot argument, and heads
were broken. So it had continued to be for many a
generation, and so it was when I came into the world, so
that people made the matter a proverb, and spoke of far
removed things as being as widely separated as a Dale
and a Watson. But out of that ancient feud and the
ill blood and evil passions it engendered much misery
was to result, as I shall show ere this story be brought
to an end.</p>

<h2>III</h2>

<h3>OF MY FIRST MEETING WITH ROSE LISLE</h3>

<p>Upon a certain fine afternoon in the early spring of 1631,
dinner being well over, and my father smoking his pipe
in the chimney-corner, while my mother was busied
elsewhere on some matter of domestic importance, I
went out into the fold, and there came across Jacob
Trusty, our cowherd, who was just then feeding twelve
fat beasts intended for an approaching cattle-fair at
Wakefield. And having nought to do I approached
Jacob with a view of hearing him talk. Many an hour,
indeed, had I spent with Jacob Trusty in and about the
farmstead, listening to his stories of bygone days, of
which he carried a various collection in his mind, side
by side with much legendary lore concerning ghosts,
fairies, and hobgoblins. My mother, to be sure, said
that Jacob was never so content as when talking to me,
which perhaps was a natural thing, seeing that he had
nursed me on his knee almost as soon as I was born,
and had always manifested a great interest in my doings.
Nevertheless, to most other people Jacob Trusty was as
cross-grained and surly as man well can be, and was
hardly ever known to give a civil answer to any that
made inquiry of him. He was even accustomed to give
advice to my father, and to comment upon what things
were done on the farm; and this, my father said, must
be excused in Jacob, because he had been, man and boy,
at Dale’s Field for a matter of fifty-three years, and had fed
the cattle in our fold under three Dales. A tall, powerfully
fashioned man was Jacob Trusty, with a great
stoop in his broad shoulders, and a somewhat large nose
which stood out of his face between the roundest and
reddest cheeks that ever man had. As for his attire, it
was always the same: a long smock that reached below
his knee, and a round cap which was secured to his head
by a woollen scarf that came over his ears, and was tied
beneath his chin. From underneath his smock peeped
Jacob’s gray stockings, terminating in large boots of
undressed leather, the soles of which were of such
prodigious thickness as to make me wonder. When
Jacob’s duties took him to market at Pontefract or
Wakefield, he added no more to his accustomed garb
than a scarlet neckcloth which he had once bought of a
mercer in York. With this round his neck, and his
thick ash cudgel in his hand, Jacob considered himself
fit for the best company in the land.</p>

<p>Upon this particular afternoon, Jacob Trusty, when I
drew near, was engaged in throwing a cart-load of
turnips into the shed wherein his twelve fat cattle were
then chained. Seeing me approach, he left off his work,
and leaned both hands on the head of his four-pronged
fork, looking waggishly at me across the turnip-heap.</p>

<p>“Well, Master William,” said Jacob Trusty.</p>

<p>“Well, Jacob,” said I.</p>

<p>“Hast had a good dinner, William?” inquired Jacob.</p>

<p>“Very good, Jacob,” I answered.</p>

<p>“That’s well, William. For if there be one thing to
thank the Lord heartily for, ’tis a good appetite. Beef,
lad, and beer; sound, home-brewed beer, is what a Dale
wants, for the Dales are always big, great-boned men,
and need support. Thy grandfather now⁠—ah, what a
man was that!”</p>

<p>“What! bigger than father, Jacob?”</p>

<p>“Od, man, ay, by two inches all ways. Natheless, thy
father will do⁠—only thou wilt be a bigger man than he
is by an inch. At least, if thou dost thy duty with cup
and trencher. Ah, as for good ale, well, there was never
ale like ours at Dale’s Field. I have been through the
Riding, and should know.”</p>

<p>Jacob wiped his mouth with his hand, and stuck one
prong of his fork into a turnip that betrayed an intention
to roll down the hill. On beholding Jacob’s hand pass
across his mouth, I knew what he wanted.</p>

<p>“Shall I fetch you a pot of ale, Jacob?” said I.</p>

<p>“Why,” said Jacob meditatively, “a quart had I at
dinner-time, and yet I do feel drouthy.”</p>

<p>Whereupon I went to the pantry, where my mother
was counting out a sitting of eggs for the speckled hen
to hatch, and begged a pot of ale for Jacob Trusty, the
which I got with very little trouble, Jacob being an
old and valued servant, and deserving of little comforts
now that he was getting into years. “Ah!” said Jacob,
leaning against the tail of his cart, and removing the
pewter from his mouth. “That does me a power o’
good, William. What a pity ’tis that the Lord in His
mercy didn’t make all the rivers run good ale! What
beautiful drinking there would ha’ been then!”</p>

<p>“But you couldn’t make ale without water, Jacob;
and then, if the rivers ran ale, what would the cattle do?”</p>

<p>“Ah, what, indeed!” answered Jacob. “Poor ignorant
creatures! Mind thee, William lad, as thou goest
through the world thou wilt see this difference “twixt
Christians and heathen men, namely, that the Christian
man drinketh his ale like a man should, while your
heathen cannot away with it! What did not Will
Stripe, that went to the wars from Badsworth village,
and did travel almost to the world’s end, come back and
tell us in the alehouse there, that he had been in lands
where there was no ale to be had? Wherefore be
thankful, lad, that thou art a Yorkshireman. As for me,
I have lived on good ale, and true-fed beef, and wheaten
bread, and am now sixty-and-eight years old, come
Martinmas, and a strong man.”</p>

<p>Whereupon he tossed off his pot, and, putting it down,
turned to the turnips, and began to fling them into the
shed with such energy that the air was dark with them,
and the twelve fat oxen tugged at their chains in fear.</p>

<p>“An I were thee, Master William,” suddenly said
Jacob Trusty, looking up from his task, and leaning his
double-chin meditatively upon the cross-bar of his
fork—“an I were thee, I should go a birds’-nesting
this fine afternoon.”</p>

<p>“Birds’-nesting, Jacob! Why, there aren’t any yet,
are there? Isn’t it too early?”</p>

<p>“Hist, lad! Dost know the old sheepfold in Went
Vale yonder? I saw a storm-cock’s nest in the elm
above it a week since. There will be eggs in that, I
doubt not. Mind⁠—”</p>

<p>But I was gone. I had not been a birds’-nesting that
year, for it was but the second or third week in March,
and with us the birds do not generally nest before April,
saving the storm-cock, or missel-thrush, as some call it,
which builds in March, so that when Jacob spoke of the
matter I was fresh and eager, and crossed the fold and
was over the wall and running across the home meadows
ere he could tell me to mind not to break my neck, with
which counsel all his information usually ended.</p>

<p>It was a beautiful day, one of those perfect days which
come in spring, and make us thank God for very joy of
life. As I ran across the meadows that lie between
Dale’s Field and the head of Went Vale, I noticed that
the grass wore a brighter green, that the hedgerows were
beginning to bud, that the ash and elm were already
starting into new life, and that everything was foretelling
the new arrival of what Master Herrick the poet calls
“the sweet o’ the year.” Yea, as I ran alongside a great
hedge seeking some convenient gap or opening, I became
aware of the odour of violets, which is, I think, the most
beautiful scent that ever delighted a man’s nostrils.
And eager as I was to get forward to the old sheepfold,
I could not but stop on smelling the violets, and gather
a few. Only a country-bred lad, indeed, could find them
so quickly as I did, for, mark you, the violets are a
modest and retiring people, and love to hide themselves
from the common eye. So you must turn up the glossy
broad leaves which cover their retreat, and push aside
the brambles under whose protection they love to grow,
and then you will find them, heavenly blue and fragrant,
nestling under the hedges like tender children that dread
the rough world. And not only violets did I find that
afternoon, but also early primroses, whose pale yellow
faces met me as soon as I entered the wood. And at
seeing them I laughed aloud for joy, for it is a saying
with us that spring is fairly come when primroses flower.
And, laughing and singing, I went through the woods
that stretch along the right bank of Went, making a
posy of violets and primroses, and thinking how pleased
my mother would be when I took them to her, and how
she would put them in a jar of fresh water, and place
them in the window-sill of her own chamber. For we
country folk, though some might not think it of us, are
fond of the flowers and blossoms that are all about our
homes, and do make as much of our first primrose or
violet as a town-bred fine dame will of a rare jewel.</p>

<p>With the blue sky peeping at me through the trees,
and the crying of new-born lambs (true and blessed sign
that spring is come again) in my ears, I went along the
woods. I passed above the mill at Wentbridge, where
the stream was pouring through the wheel-house like a
cataract, and turned by a steep path towards the old
sheepfold, which was a rough place of four walls and a
thatched roof, where we had kept sheep at such times
as they were out at pasture in the valley just beneath.
There was a clearing all round the sheepfold, and this
was hedged in from the wood by a straggling belt of
trees, amongst which the most prominent was a great
elm that had once been struck by lightning, and had
since only blossomed in a few of its boughs. And
it was in the thick of these, where the fresh green shoots
were just beginning to bud, that I espied the stormcock’s
nest of which Jacob Trusty had told me.</p>

<p>Now, I had never yet been daunted in the matter of
climbing tree or tower, and as for fear, I knew not
what it was, nevertheless I paused and meditated before
climbing the elm that afternoon. For the storm-cock,
wise beyond his station, had fixed his house where the
boughs were not strong enough to bear me or any boy
capable of climbing. Nevertheless, I was not to be
easily worsted, and spying a bough underneath the nest
from which it seemed probable that I should be able to
reach over, I took off cap and coat and began to climb
up the rough trunk of the elm. This part of the business
was easy enough, for a quantity of ivy grew round
that elm, and the twisted strands made good purchase.
Likewise, it was easy enough when, having done with
the ivy, I clambered out along the bough towards the
spot where the nest hung swaying in the twigs above.
But being arrived there, I came to a standstill, for the
nest was a good foot above the full stretch of my arm,
and therefore out of my reach. This disconcerted me
for a time, but I made up my mind to carry home an
egg in triumph, and therefore cast about for fresh means.
And nothing seeming better than to lay hold of an
overhanging bough, and swing myself up to the level of the
nest, I seized upon one that hung conveniently, and
proceeded to climb it hand over hand, my body meanwhile
swinging in mid-air, in what my mother, had she
been there, would have considered a dangerous fashion.
And dangerous indeed it proved to be, for I had no
sooner got to the level of the nest and peeped over and
seen four eggs lying therein, than my right hand slipped,
and I went tumbling through branch and bough with a
great noise, and came to earth with such a prodigious
bump that my eyes flashed fire, and my senses went
clean away from me.</p>

<p>It was perhaps due to the thickness of my skull and
the strength of my neck and shoulders that I was preserved
from broken bones, for in falling I had turned
clean over, and so pitched right upon my crown, just as
a cat will always fall upon her feet. However, my head
is a thick and somewhat wooden one, and after a time I
sat up, and by dint of hard rubbing brought back my
wits to their proper place, not without a feeling that they
had else gone a wool-gathering, and a knowledge that
my forehead and neck ached as though I had fallen from
the church tower. Yet I minded the aches and pains
not so much as that the storm-cock’s nest still hung
swaying in the branches high above me. For I had
never, since being first put into breeches, liked to be
beaten in anything, and I now reflected that the stormcock
had proved itself my master.</p>

<p>While I sat rubbing my head, and wondering what
Jacob Trusty would say to my tumble, I heard a sound
which made me pause and listen. It was the voice of a
girl singing in the wood close by, a pure, sweet, clear
voice, though childish, and the words it sang were these:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>
	“Spring is coming o’er the hill!<br/>
	Primrose pale and daffodil,<br/>
	Daisies white and rosy,<br/>
	Now are springing from the soil.<br/>
	Tread ye lightly, lest ye spoil<br/>
	My Lady’s posy.
</p>

<p>
	“Bring me, from some mossy stone,<br/>
	Violets that all alone<br/>
	Burst to perfect flower.<br/>
	These, with snowdrops pure and white,<br/>
	Wet with morning’s dew, shall light<br/>
	My Lady’s bower!”
</p>

</blockquote>

<p>Now as this song went on, the sounds came nearer and
nearer, and at length I saw, coming up the path by
which I had climbed towards the sheepfold, a girl who
carried a little basket of primroses and violets in one
hand, and swung her little hood in the other. She saw
me not as she came along the path, for I lay there still
as any mouse, wondering who she might be. But when
she came into the clearing and looked round her, she
espied me, and stopped short as she was beginning
another verse of her song. And so there we were,
neither saying aught, but both staring wide-eyed at each
other. And now if I were a poet or a spinner of fine
words, such as they use in courts and fashionable places,
I might perhaps tell you with justice how my dear love,
as she came to be in after years, looked upon that
afternoon when I first set eyes upon her. For though she
was then but a child of eight years old, she was already
so bewitching that I could not but gaze at her with something
like wonder in my lad’s heart. She was like Little
Red Riding Hood in the fairy tale, for her hood, swinging
loosely from her tiny brown hand, was red, and the
little cloak above her gray, homespun gown was red,
and she had dainty scarlet shoes upon her feet such as I
had never seen. As for her face, it was dark and gipsy-like,
and her hair, black as night, tumbled loosely on
each side, and fell across her shoulders; and her eyes,
large and wondering as she looked at me, were darker
than her hair. Yet can I give no true account of her
with words, for it would need the brush of some great
painter to represent her as she seemed to me then, and
as I remember her to this day.</p>

<p>Now, when we had looked at each other for some
minutes I tried to rise to my feet. But the buzzing in
my head was by no means gone, and I was no sooner up
than down again. Wherewith my new acquaintance
cast down her basket and ran to me, and looked at me
with pitying eyes.</p>

<p>“Oh,” cried she, “you are hurt, poor boy!”</p>

<p>“Nay,” quoth I, “ ’tis nought. I have tumbled from
higher trees than yon elm.”</p>

<p>But she stayed not to hear me, but seized upon my
cap and ran away, and presently came back with water
in it, with which she wet my forehead like any skilled
nurse, all the time telling me to lie still lest in rising 1
grew sick and fainted away. Howbeit, I, like all lads,
grew restive under female treatment, and presently rose
and put on my jacket, and gave myself a mighty shake
and felt right again, save for a slight ache in the back
of my head. And this done, I stood looking at the little
maiden, saying nothing, but wondering a good deal.</p>

<p>“And now,” quoth she, “take hold of my hand, else
you will fall again going down the path.”</p>

<p>But I laughed and shook my head. “I am all right
now,” said I, and glanced up at the storm-cock’s nest,
half minded to try it again. But my head was still
running somewhat, and I made a vow to come back
next day, so that if I fell once more there should be
none to witness my defeat.</p>

<p>“What is your name?” said the little maid presently.</p>

<p>“William Dale; and my father’s name is William
Dale, too, and we live at Dale’s Field,” said I.
“What is yours?”</p>

<p>“Mine is Rose Lisle.”</p>

<p>“Lisle? There are no Lisles hereabouts,” said I. “Where do
you come from?”</p>

<p>“From a long way off⁠—near London. Father brought
me on his horse to Wentbridge two days since, and in a
day or two he will come and take me away again.”</p>

<p>Now, I know not why, but when Rose Lisle said that
she was going away, there was a feeling of regret came
into my heart. For indeed, I had never seen aught like
her before, and might never, for aught I knew, see aught
like her again.</p>

<h2>IV</h2>

<h3>OF PHILIP LISLE AND HIS GOOD HORSE CÆSAR</h3>

<p>“I am going to find primroses,” said Rose, picking up her
basket.</p>

<p>“I know where they grow,” said I. “Come along, and
I will show you the best places.”</p>

<p>And so we went through the wood, gay as the spring
air that breathed upon us, and talking childlike about
ourselves and our fathers and of such matters as children
best love to dwell on. And presently the shyness wore
off and we ran along hand in hand amongst the trees,
and I showed her where I had climbed the crags for the
jackdaw’s nest, and took her to the bank of the Went at
the place where you can throw a stone across five times
in one cast, and from thence we wandered down stream
to the mill, where the miller and his men peered at us
through a mist of dusty whiteness, and the Went ran
howling through the great wheel and fled away in thick
circles of spume. And I told her about our farm of
Dale’s Field, and how many horses we had, and how
many cattle and sheep, with many particulars concerning
Dumpling the pony, and Jacob Trusty, and Timothy
Grass, and other matters upon which I loved to talk.
She, in return, told me that she lived in a town a long,
long way off, as indeed it must have been, seeing that
it was but an hour’s ride from London itself. As for
mother, or sister, or brother, she had none, nor ever
remembered having, nor any other relation save her
father, who was called Philip Lisle, and had business
that took him much from home. And at Barnet, which
was where they lived, they stayed with Mistress Goodfellow,
who, said Rose, was an old woman, and sometimes
cross-grained. But her father, she said, was the
most admirable man that ever lived, for he could sing
and dance, and play music upon several instruments,
and tell stories and legends, so that when he was at
home they were as happy as the day is long. But sometimes,
she said, he was away a long time, and she was
lonely until he came again, bringing her various rare
things which he had found in his travels, and then they
were happy once more. And now and then he took her
with him when the weather was fine, she riding before him
on his great horse, and he telling her stories of the fine
houses they passed, or the dark woods through which
they rode. Much did she tell me, too, about her father’s
horse, which understood him when he talked to it as if
it had been a Christian, and would follow him about,
and ate bread and sugar out of his hand, and had
more than once saved his life, though how she did not
know.</p>

<p>In discourse like this Rose Lisle and I passed the
afternoon, and I forgot the ache in my head in listening
to her conversation. But as it drew near supper-time I
was forced to leave her, and said good-bye to her with
much regret, and she went down the lane into Wentbridge
while I climbed the valley slope and went across
the meadows home. And though I told Jacob Trusty
about my tumble from the elm-tree, yet I said nothing
either to him or to my sister Lucy about Rose Lisle.
Only I thought much about her, and wished that she
was going to stay in our neighbourhood, so that Lucy
and myself might take her with us when we went birds’-nesting,
or blackberrying, or nutting.</p>

<p>Upon the next afternoon I set off again to the old
sheepfold, determined to climb the elm with success.
But I left Lucy at home, not being minded to let anyone
see me tumble down again. However, as fortune
would have it, the storm-cock escaped once more; for I
had no sooner got into the woods above Wentbridge
Mill than I met Rose Lisle, who was once more gathering
the primroses that were now springing up in every nook
and corner. And so through the woods we went, as on
the previous day, and rambled in and out all the afternoon
until we came to the mill again, where we stood
beside the stream and watched the bits of stick and twig
race by.</p>

<p>While we stood there I became aware of someone
calling to us, and looking across the stream saw a man
on horseback, at sight of whom Rose raised a glad cry.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis my father!” said she. “Will Dale, ’tis my
father. Let us run round by the mill-bridge.”</p>

<p>But I saw that the man was going to leap his horse
across the stream, which is there about twenty feet in
width. And calling to us to stand where we were, he
turned his horse about and brought him at the Went,
and the great brute tucked up his thighs and came clear
across with a motion like a swallow flying. The man
gave him an encouraging pat as he dismounted, and
throwing the bridle loose, took Rose in his arms and
lifted her up and kissed her.</p>

<p>“Well, my princess!” said he. “Here is thy father
back again, safe and sound once more. Thy cheeks are
the rosier, my beauty, for thy little outing.”</p>

<p>And then he kissed her again on both cheeks, and I
saw his eyes sparkle as if it were a great delight to him
to see Rose again. He was a tall, fine man, this Philip
Lisle, and looked like the sort that order and command
other men naturally. His greatness was not of the sort
that I was familiar with, for he was not like my father⁠—tall
and broad and big in every way, but rather slender
and elegantly fashioned, and more like a willow-wand
than an oak-tree. Nevertheless, there was that in his
face which gave an impression of power; and I could
not help noticing that his hands, which were very white
and shapely, were also tense as bands of steel when
he grasped anything. Looking at him I no longer
wondered that Rose was dark, for Philip Lisle’s hair and
moustachios were like jet, and the eyes were black as
the delicate eyebrows above them. He was dressed very
much finer than most in our parts, and looked, in fact,
like one of the gay Cavaliers that sometimes rode by our
gates along the Great North Road. His horse, too, was
finely caparisoned, and there were two pistols peeping
out of the holsters on each side of the saddle, which
shone so in the sunlight that I was sure they were
fashioned of silver.</p>

<p>“And who is this bonny lad?” said Philip Lisle, turning
to me, with Rose still perched on his shoulder.</p>

<p>“It is William Dale, father, and he lives over the bend
of the hill yonder,” said Rose, while I stood and stared
at the man’s handsome face and fine clothes, and clean
lost my tongue for admiration; “and he has shown me
where the primroses grow best, and where the birds’-nests
are, and where he fell down the crags from the
jackdaw’s nest.”</p>

<p>“Ah, a Dale? Lad, I should have known thee. The
Dales were always big men, as I have heard, though I
never saw but two⁠—thy grandfather and thy father.
Thou wilt be a big man like them, Will.”</p>

<p>“Does my father know you then, sir?” I asked, being
surprised to hear him speak thus familiarly of my family.</p>

<p>He laughed and stroked his horse’s neck, the creature
having come up to him and pushed his nose under Philip
Lisle’s arm.</p>

<p>“There are few, lad, that do not know me. Howeever⁠—But
what thinkest thou of my horse, Will? Is’t
not a beauty? Ye have no horse in all the three Ridings
like this. Cæsar his name is, for he is the emperor of
the horse race, as Cæsar was of the human. However,
he, too, like Cæsar, may fall a victim to treachery. But
thy master will be there, old friend, will not he? Yea,
whenever death comes, let it be red death, or black
death, in bed or afield, it will find thee and me together.”</p>

<p>The horse lifted its head and whinnied, and pushed
its nose against the man’s face, and I stood dumb to see
the marvellous understanding between them. For it
seemed to comprehend exactly what he said, which was
what I had never seen in a horse before, save that they
learn and obey the few words of command by which men
make known their desires.</p>

<p>“But what talk I of death,” said Philip Lisle, “with
two such rosy faces before me? Children, would ye like
a ride on horse Cæsar’s back? Will, climb into my
saddle, and I will put Rose behind thee. So, put thy
feet in the stirrup-leathers. Thy legs are too short yet
to reach the stirrups, though thou wilt quickly mend
that matter. And now have no fear, but hold thy bridle
tight; and Rose, my princess, cling firm to Will’s waist;
and thou, Cæsar, remember what thou carriest, and be
on thy best behaviour. And now, off!”</p>

<p>And away we went over the ground on Cæsar’s back
at a swift canter, and yet travelling as safely as if we
had been in an easy-chair. For I had but to keep my
knees well pressed to the saddle, as my father had
taught me, and Rose had but to circle my waist with her
dainty arms, and beyond that we had no trouble to take.
But never before or since have I crossed a horse which
went over the ground as that did. For it was like the
motion of a greyhound, which runs straight and smooth
and swift, and makes never a sound as the soft feet
touch the ground and fly onward. And so we circled
down the bank and turned, and came round again to
where Philip Lisle stood. And he lifted us down and
patted Cæsar’s neck.</p>

<p>“Thou hast never ridden horse like that, Will, eh?”
said he. “Ah, this horse hath soul in him, and mind.
Well, we must hence. Rose, I am going to take thee
home. We shall sleep at Retford to-night, and so say
good-bye to Will Dale.”</p>

<p>She came up to me where I stood silent and sad, and
lifted up her little red rosebud of a mouth to kiss me.
And, why I know not, I was so moved, that I put my
arm about her neck and kissed her again and again, and
then turned and cast down my eyes, and, I dare say,
blushed as red as any June rose.</p>

<p>“Nay, lad,” said Philip Lisle, “be not ashamed. Alack,
I wonder if ye will kiss next time ye meet? Who
knows?”</p>

<p>“Oh, father,” cried Rose, “bring me again to see Will.”</p>

<p>“Wouldst like to see Rose again, Will?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, very much,” said I.</p>

<p>“Then thou shalt, but when I cannot say. Nevertheless,
thou shalt. And now farewell, Will. Stay, there
is a guinea for thee. Put it in thy breeches pocket, lad.”</p>

<p>He swung into the saddle, and, stooping down, lifted
Rose before him and put one arm round her. And again
he cried, “Farewell, Will Dale,” and again Rose kissed
the tips of her fingers to me, and he called to Cæsar,
and the horse started forward like an arrow out of a
bow, and away they went along the valley, and Rose’s
voice came to me on the wind, crying, “Good-bye, dear
Will, good-bye!” And then they were out of sight, and
I turned away and climbed the hill, and went straight to
Jacob Trusty, who was bedding down his twelve fat oxen
for the night.</p>

<p>“Jacob,” said I, when I made sure that we were all
alone in the straw shed, “Jacob, did you ever hear of a
man called Philip Lisle?”</p>

<p>“Ay, marry,” said Jacob, sticking his fork into a great
heap of straw, and lifting the latter on his back with a
prodigious grunt. “Ay, marry, have I!” What, man,
and so hast thou. Did I never tell ’ee of Black Phil?”</p>

<p>“What, Black Phil the highwayman? Is he the same
as Philip Lisle?”</p>

<p>“Od’s mercy, ay, and no other! Ay, Philip Lisle he
was called once upon a time, but now Black Phil, by
reason of his dark face. Natheless, ’tis a gentleman
born, and hath rank and blood. But what matter⁠—he
is a highwayman, and must finally swing on gallow tree.
For look ’ee, William, boy, as you go through the world
you will see one thing⁠—namely, that if a man give
himself to evil courses he may prosper for awhile, but ’tis
the gallows in the end that rewardeth him, even as it
saith in Holy Writ.”</p>

<p>And Jacob went down the fold with his straw, and into
the beast-place, and there made such a rattling and
shouting amongst the fat oxen, that the whole place
shook again. Which done, he came leisurely across the
fold, picking up a fork full of straw here and there, and
coming into the straw-shed again, continued his discourse.</p>

<p>“This trade of highwayman, William, boy, is a parlous
one, and many a man that hath gone into it hath oft
wished he could get out on’t as easy as he went in. For
look you, lad, your highwayman, though he ride a good
horse and wear fine clothes, doth neither at his own
expense, but rather at the cost of them whom he robbeth.
Likewise he is against the law, which is a bad matter
for any man. Howbeit, I had liefer be robbed by a
highwayman than a lawyer, for your lawyer laughs in
your face while he turns out your pockets, but your
highwayman is as courtly as any fine court-madam.
These things have I noticed, William, boy, in going
through the world; for, though I be of this parish born
and bred, I have travelled, yea, I have travelled even to
the city of Lincoln, and again as far as Brough Hill in
the county of Westmoreland, which last is as heathen a
land as ever man knew, and full of high mountains and
deep precipices. But as for this Black Phil, now⁠—’tis a
good heart, and the poor folk do think a deal of him.
For if he rob a lord, or maybe a bishop, riding along
the road in his own carriage, what doth he do but gallop
off to some place where there is a hard winter or griping
times, and there share the money? So that there is not
a poor man ’twixt York and London that would not give
Black Phil shelter and help if he were pursued by King’s
officers. However, he hath not ridden in these parts
this five year. And now, William, lad, go beg a mug of
small beer from thy good mother, for my mouth is as
dry as any lime-kiln.”</p>

<p>When I had carried Jacob his mug of small ale, I left
him and went and walked by myself in the garden.
And there I thought over the events of the past two days,
which had been more astonishing than any that had
ever come into my young life previously. I had seen a
real highwayman, and had talked with him, and he
spoke like other men, and was habited like a gentleman,
and was, I was sure, a man of kind heart, by the way he
caressed his daughter and spoke to me. And I felt very
sorry for Philip Lisle, and wondered what little Rose
would do when they hanged her father, as they would
do in the end, because Jacob Trusty said so. However,
I decided that in that case I would beg my father to let
Rose live with us, knowing that she and Lucy would
agree well. And I further thought that in that case
Philip Lisle would leave me his horse Cæsar, with the
two silver pistols and fine saddle, but I did not wish the
King’s officers to catch him for all that.</p>

<p>Now, while I walked round the garden with my hands
in my pockets, I found my fingers clinging round Philip
Lisle’s guinea, and fell a-wondering what I should do
with it. I was very shy of speaking to anyone about
my two new friends, and I knew that if I showed my
money I should have to tell how I had come by it. It
was not probable, I knew, that I should be allowed to
keep the guinea if my mother knew whence it came.
But, though I set no store by money, having no occasion
for it, I was not minded to give up my guinea, for Philip
Lisle had spoken kindly to me in giving it, and it might
be that it really was his own to give. So I went into the
house, and found a little leaden box which Jacob Trusty
had once bestowed upon me, and I wrapped up the guinea
within a sheet of paper, inside which I placed a primrose
that Rose Lisle had pinned in my coat that afternoon,
and I put the paper in the leaden box, and fetched a
spade and dug a hole in the corner of my own patch of
garden, and buried the leaden box two feet deep, and put
stones above and below it, and stamped the earth well in,
and so hid out of sight the connecting link ’twixt me and
Philip Lisle.</p>

<h2>V</h2>

<h3>OF MY FIRST GOING TO SCHOOL</h3>

<p>Upon the very evening of the day whereon I had buried
Philip Lisle’s guinea in a corner of my garden, there
came to our house Parson Drumbleforth, who had walked
along the highway from Darrington to hold converse
with my father and mother. And our Lucy, seeing him
approach from afar aff, ran quickly indoors, and told my
mother, who immediately caused a fire to be lighted in
the best parlour, the spring evenings being ofttimes
chilly for old bones, and Parson Drumbleforth having
got past his vigour. So presently he came in sight, and
advanced along the garden walks, and was met at the
door by my mother with a respectful courtesy. But he
would have naught of the best parlour.</p>

<p>“Let me go into your own chamber, Mistress Dale,”
said he, “where is, I know, such an easy-chair as would
fit judge or bishop, let alone a humble clerk, and where
the fire hath burnt all day. Your best parlour, sure, is
very fine accommodation, but cold, mistress, cold.”</p>

<p>“Why, surely,” said my mother, “an I had known
your Reverence was coming there should have been a fire
lighted hours ago. However, my own parlour hath had
a fire in it since noon.”</p>

<p>Whereupon she led him to the easy-chair in her own
room, and Lucy and myself followed in and paid our
respects to the Vicar, and admired his white bands and
the silver buckles of his shoes, and looked at his staff,
which was a clouded cane with a heavy silver knob of
great value. And the Parson having stretched forth his
hands to the blaze, and asked us how we did, and if we
were faithful in our duties to our parents, I was sent
forth into the yard to find my father, who had gone out
awhile before to consult Timothy Grass and Jacob Trusty
about certain yearlings which he had just bought at
Wakefield fair. And finding him, he at once broke off
his discourse and went into the house and greeted the
Vicar, and brought forth tobacco and pipes, and they
both smoked, and my mother went into the kitchen and
made a pitcher of mulled ale, of which grateful drink
Parson Drumbleforth was an admirer. And my father
and the Vicar discoursed of the weather, and the crop of
lambs, and the prospect of the coming harvests, hay and
corn, and Lucy and I listened and strove hard to behave
ourselves with propriety. And the mulled ale having
been brought in and the glasses filled, the Vicar pledged
us all and commended the drink mightily, after which
the pitcher was put on the hob to keep warm, and my
mother sat down to her needle.</p>

<p>“Master and Mistress Dale,” presently said Parson
Drumbleforth, “I am come here to-night on an important
matter. Ye have here a great lad—stand up, William,
my child, and let us look at thee; why, thou art nearly
to my shoulder already!—ye have here, I say, a great
lad, who is fast growing towards manhood.”</p>

<p>“Oh, sir!” cried my mother. “Manhood! Why, ’tis
but a child.”</p>

<p>“Softly, softly, mistress. I say manhood, and rightly.
For before ye see the change he will be a youth, and then
a man, ay, and a bigger man than his father.”</p>

<p>“He will, he will,” said my father. “Ay, he will be an
inch bigger than I am all ways. However, I am six foot
three in my stockings.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a fine lad, indeed,” said Parson Drumbleforth,
measuring me with a critical eye. “Wherefore the greater
responsibility resteth upon you.”</p>

<p>“Your own boy, sir, Master John, is a big-made boy,
too,” said my mother, anxious to return the Vicar’s
compliments.</p>

<p>“So, so. A sturdy knave is Jack, and strong enough,
but rather broad than long. However, your mention of
Jack, Mistress Dale, brings me back to where I set out
from. It is time, Master Dale, that this great lad went
to school.”</p>

<p>“He hath learnt from me, sir,” said my mother, looking
anxiously at me. “What I could teach him he hath
learnt, so that now he can read his Catechism in the
Prayer-book, and knoweth his duty, and—”</p>

<p>“Mistress Dale,” interrupted Parson Drumbleforth, “I
know well that you are a scholar, and able to impart
knowledge to your children. As for this little maiden,
let her continue to learn from her mother. But as for
Will here, let him to school, where men will teach him,
and he will mix with his fellows.”</p>

<p>“But, sir,” said my mother, “there is no school at
hand. For it is too far for him to walk twice a day ’twixt
here and Pontefract.”</p>

<p>“Then he must board with the master, my good
friend Dr. Parsons,” said Parson Drumbleforth. “He
will not charge you overmuch for the lad’s eating and
sleeping. On a Saturday let him come home, so that he
may enjoy the benefit of my ministry on a Sunday, and
on a Monday morning let him be off again bright and
early.”</p>

<p>“He hath never slept away from home in his life,” said
my mother. “And I always fear damp beds in strange
houses. Our own, sir, if not slept in for awhile, are aired
for days before we use them again, but all folks are not
so particular.”</p>

<p>“Tut, tut, mistress, the beds will be aired I warrant.
Mistress Parsons is a careful housewife. What say’st
thou, Master Dale?”</p>

<p>“I am for the lad to go,” said my father. “ ’Twill do
him no harm to live with others of his age.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a good school, the Queen’s School at Pontefract,”
said the Vicar. “My own lad, Jack, hath been there
since Christmas, and though somewhat of a woodenhead,
he hath picked up a good deal. Wouldst like to go
with Jack to school, Will?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, very much,” I answered.</p>

<p>And in the end it was decided that I should go; and
my father promised to ride into Pontefract the next
morning, and there make arrangements with Dr. Parsons
about my board and lodging in the master’s house. And
so overjoyed was I at the prospect that I could hardly
sleep that night. But early next morning I rose and
sought out Jacob Trusty, and told him the news.</p>

<p>“Thou wilt have to fight, William,” said he; “yea,
thou wilt have to fight. However, I have no fear for
thee. And when thou hast fought and beaten the biggest
lad in the school, thou wilt be much respected. For in
going through the world, William, boy, thou wilt see one
thing, namely, that men never so much respect their
fellows as when the same have shown their power.
Wherefore remember to hit hard and straight, and to
care nothing for what thou gettest in return.”</p>

<p>And then returned my father from Pontefract, with
news that he had made arrangements with Dr. Parsons,
and I was to go the next Monday; and he had seen Mrs. Parsons,
who had promised faithfully to see that my bed
was duly aired, upon which assurance my mother
plucked up some small comfort, though she was not
at all reconciled to the idea of parting with me. And
after that all was hurry and bustle in our house, for my
mother must see to my new shirts and handkerchiefs,
and Lucy must broider my name upon each article, and
there was repairing of garments and washing and ironing,
so that, as my father said, I might have been going on a
voyage to the Indies instead of only to Pontefract. But
I have observed that mothers do take a pleasure in
making a fuss after their children, and are never so
pleased as when busying themselves in that way. It is
something which a man cannot understand, but women
with children to care for understand it readily.</p>

<p>And so the Monday morning came round, and
Timothy Grass harnessed one of the horses to our light
spring cart, and my box was put therein and my father
took the reins, and I kissed my mother and Lucy, with
many admonitions to the latter to take care of my dog
Rover, whom I had perforce to leave behind me, and
away we drove down the road. I felt an important
personage that morning, for I had not only a new suit of
homespun upon me, but in the pockets of my breeches
there lay a new crown piece given me by my mother,
and a shilling presented to me by Lucy, and Jacob
Trusty had given me a knife which I had often envied
him the possession of, and which had three blades, and
a pick for taking stones out of a horse’s hoof.</p>

<p>On the road between Darrington and Pontefract we
came upon Master John Drumbleforth, who was trudging
his way to school. My father pulled up the horse, and
civilly inquired if Master John would accept of a lift, a
question which he at once answered by climbing into the
spring cart.</p>

<p>“Why,” said he, “I had at any time sooner ride than
walk, as you may well imagine, Master Dale. And so
thou art going to school, Will? Well, I will look after
thee, if need be.”</p>

<p>He was a rather solid, heavy-looking lad, this Jack
Drumbleforth, with a round shining face, and big limbs,
but no great height. Unlike his father, the Vicar, he
was no deep nor apt scholar, but rather delighted in
sports and games, and in an outdoor life. Nevertheless,
he was not so dull as to lack observation, and knowing
that learning is a thing which helps every man that
strives to obtain it, he worked hard, in a plodding,
laboured fashion, and acquired some knowledge. There
were lads of his own age of more brilliant parts, who
dashed ahead at a great pace, and could write Latin
verses ere ever Jack Drumbleforth had mastered his <i>hic,
hæc, hoc</i>, but in the end the tortoise caught the hare,
for though Jack was undeniably slow he was very sure.</p>

<p>The new world into which I was now plunged
furnished me with much matter of surprise and wonder.
Until that time I had seen little of the world, my
observations having been confined to an occasional visit
to Pontefract market with my parents, which excursions
had been great events in my life, and were eagerly
expected and pleasurably regretted. Now, however, I
was thrown into the company of some hundred and
twenty lads, whose ages ranged from ten to fifteen years.
Also I was brought under the rule of the Reverend Dr. Parsons,
the head-master, and his assistants, who were
younger men, but also scholars and clergymen, and
exceeding grave. There was also Mrs. Parsons, the
doctor’s wife, who was a motherly lady, and took as
much care of us who lived in the head-master’s house as
if we had been her own children. For if we needed it
she dosed us with medicine, and if one did cut or bruise
himself she repaired the damage with lint or oils, and
there were poulticings for colds and gruel for such as
were unfit for stronger meat, and the weakly were tended
with much care. Because of all these things good Mrs. Parsons
was much thought of by the lads, and highly
respected by their parents. She was a little bustling
woman, always cheerful and always ready, and I have
since thought that she manifested the greater care for us
because it had not pleased Providence that she should
have children of her own.</p>

<p>As for Dr. Parsons, he was a little man, somewhat
stout, very nimble and active, red-faced and smiling, a
strict master, never sparing the birch, and always just
in his decisions; wherefore there was hardly a lad in
the school who did not feel that praise or punishment
was properly meted out. For he confused not the sharp
lad with the slow, and made a fine distinction between
them that attained knowledge by leaps and bounds, and
them that reached it by gradual and constant labour.
The dull lad who plodded on patiently met in him a
kind and indulgent master; the clever but idle boy
received from him a vast amount of watching and of
castigation. Half-done work he could not abide, and
would rather have had a slow lad work at a task for two
hours and know it than see a more sharp-witted one
master it in ten minutes.</p>

<p>“Thou art a great lad, William Dale,” said Dr. Parsons
to me, when my father had bidden me farewell
and departed, “and I doubt not thy mind runneth more
on birds’-nests and such-like than on learning. Nay,
lad, that is but natural, and none but a fool would have
it otherwise. I shall not plague thee overmuch with
learning. This counsel, however, I give thee—what
thou dost learn, learn well, and be not ashamed if it
takes thee two days to master what a sharper lad would
master in one. It is better to know why a thing is done
than how it is done. Get to the bottom of everything.
Let me see thee work steadily, eating thy meals with a
good appetite, and behaving towards me and thy fellows
as to thy parents and sister. So shall I be satisfied with
thee, William. And now, perchance thou wilt get
fighting with some of these lads of mine. Well, ’tis one
of those things which our perverse human nature
prompteth us to. However, William Dale, bear this in
mind—never fight until thou art bound to do so. Be
not the aggressor. He that gives cause of offence
deserveth punishing. So when thou art forced to fight,
fight not in anger, but with cool temper, and remember
that a shot straight out from the left shoulder is a
wonderful thing to cool down thy adversary. And now
let us to school.”</p>

<p>When I had had time to look round me, I discovered
that of all my new associates there were but two of whom
I had any knowledge. One of these was John Drumbleforth,
the other was Dennis Watson, the son of that
Watson of Castle Hill to whom I have already made
reference as being the enemy of my family. This
Dennis was a lad somewhat my senior, of a dark and
rather forbidding countenance, very masterful, and apt
to bear malice against any who fell under his displeasure.
Save that I had now and then seen him about his
father’s land I knew nothing of him. Between a Dale
and a Watson there was never any speech. If we did
but meet in the highways we passed each other without
word or look. Wherefore I was not over-well pleased to
find Dennis Watson amongst my schoolmates. For
though I had been taught to hate no man, yet I had a
hearty dislike to any representative of the race which
had been our enemies for many a generation.</p>

<p>Out of consideration for my newness, Mrs. Parsons
put me to sleep in the chamber in which slept Jack
Drumbleforth and two other boys of a like age. With
these three I naturally became closely acquainted. The
name of one of my new room-mates was Thomas Thorpe,
the son of a steward on one of the neighbouring great
estates; the other was Benjamin Tuckett, nephew of
Mr. John Tuckett, the grocer in the market-place. Ben
Tuckett had neither father nor mother, and his uncle’s
wife having an objection to great boys in the house, Ben
was sent to Dr. Parsons until he should be of an age to
be apprenticed to some trade. He was a round-faced,
pleasant-tempered lad, always lively, always willing to
do anyone a good turn, so that he was universally liked.
Between Ben and me and Tom Thorpe and Jack
Drumbleforth grew up a strong friendship, which lasted
many years, until death severed it.</p>

<p>Now, from the very first day of my going to school,
Dennis Watson made a dead set at me, pouring out upon
me as it were all the hatred and malice which his house
had for mine. Being somewhat more experienced of the
world than I—for he had been at school two years when
I went there—he had an advantage over me in some
respects, and failed not to use it. He had a following of
his own amongst the boys, all those who served under
his leadership being noted as comprising the evilly-disposed
portion of our little community. Presently it
became the fashion among these lads to make sport of
me, annoying me in whatever way their ingenuity could
devise. Thus, if I were engaged in preparing my tasks,
I should find a pot of ink spilt over my fair copies, or if
I were playing with my fellows in the yard, someone
would rudely knock me over, as if by accident. Howbeit,
being of an easy nature, I took little notice of these
matters until one day came when, by the advice of my
three room-mates, I determined to stand it no longer.
So when one of Dennis Watson’s men, as if by accident,
trod rudely on my toes, I seized him by the collar, and
marched him up to where Dennis and his chief associates
were standing together. And then I think the whole
school saw that something was about to happen, for it
gathered round us, and I suddenly found Jack Drumbleforth
and Ben Tuckett at my elbow, and Tom Thorpe
making his way to me through the throng.</p>

<p>“Now,” said I, shaking the boy, a small one, who had
stamped upon my toes, “the next time you or any other
treads on me, or spills ink on my paper, or makes other
like mistake, I shall take his head and knock it against
the wall! That is fair warning.”</p>

<p>Then Dennis Watson laughed in a sneering fashion,
and his mates echoed him.</p>

<p>“Pooh!” quoth he; “we all know that William Dale
has not heart to fight even a small boy, let alone one his
own size.”</p>

<p>“Do you?” I said, going straight to him; “then,
Dennis Watson, as you are older than I, and as big, I
will fight you now.”</p>

<p>But he would have kept out of that if he could.
Nevertheless, his own party edged him on to fight, and
mine insisted on it, and presently we were all behind the
school-wall, and our seconds were holding our coats.
And I, remembering the doctor’s counsel to keep cool,
kept cool as long as I could, and at the right moment I
gave my opponent one from the left shoulder which
spoiled his looks for many a day. And after that there
was no more teasing of me, but I was much respected.</p>

<p>Two days afterwards came Dennis Watson to me, as I
crossed the playground alone. “Will Dale,” said he,
with a strange look of hatred on his face, “I hate you,
and always shall. And however long I live, I will cause
you such trouble as will make you wish you had never
been born.”</p>

<p>Now at the time I made light of this threat, and
laughed at it. But I remembered it many a time in the
years which followed.</p>

<h2>VI</h2>

<h3>OF THE DISPUTE IN THE MARKET-PLACE</h3>

<p>It was in the middle of spring when I was first taken to
school, and my life till the end of the following summer
was comparatively uneventful. On Saturdays I went
home, to tell Jacob Trusty of my doings during the
week, and to receive his counsel and admonition on
various matters. Those week-end visits home were
great events. On the Saturday I visited all my old
haunts, took out my dog, saw to my garden, and went
round the farmstead renewing acquaintance with man
and beast. On the Sunday we went to church as usual.
Then came Monday morning again, and I wended my
way to school once more, generally catching up Jack
Drumbleforth on the road. Having fought and beaten
Dennis Watson, there was little else left me to do in that
line, for no lad of my own age and size cared to fight
with me, and the elder lads were, of course, above battling
with their junior. So I went on with my tasks in a
steady and laborious fashion, not being over-ready of
perception, but still determined to do what lay in me.
In this manner of life the months passed on quietly.
But just as summer was over, and we had brought home
the last load of the corn-harvest, there came matters
which changed the whole course of my life.</p>

<p>I have already told you that between the Watsons of
Castle Hill and the Dales of Dale’s Field there was an
ancient root of contention in the shape of a piece of land
lying between our respective estates. The ownership of
this, which was but a strip of meadow, had been disputed
’twixt Dale and Watson for many a generation, though
neither side had ever sought the aid of the law in order
to settle matters once and for all. Formerly, if one
house had sent flocks to graze on the debatable ground,
the other had forthwith driven the offending animals
away. Sometimes blows had arisen from this proceeding, and
the servants from each farmstead had turned
out with quarter-staff or cudgel, and fought fiercely one
with another. But for nearly fifty years previous to my
time neither side had claimed the land, though both
were equally careful that no right of way should be
established across it by third parties. Yet although
matters had been quiet, the red spirit of dislike and
resentment ran strong as ever, and of all men in that
neighbourhood, Rupert Watson of Castle Hill was the
only one that my father never held speech with.</p>

<p>It was the first week of September, 1631, and by
permission of Dr. Parsons I had come home from school
on the Thursday in order to be present at our harvest-supper,
which was a great event, and not to be missed
on any account. There were gathered together on that
occasion all our servants, male and female, all that ever
worked for us on odd days during the year, such as at
turnip-hoeing or sheep-shearing times, and with them
came their wives and families, so that our great barn
was well filled. There were also two or three farmers of
our acquaintance from the neighbouring villages, and
sometimes Parson Drumbleforth was present to hallow
the ceremony, as he indeed was upon this occasion, and
with him Jack, who had been permitted to beg off from
school. Great doings there were at our harvest-supper,
namely, an abundance of provisions and good cheer, and
after that dancing to the music of the village fiddler, who
sat on a tub in the centre, and played for all he was
worth until neither man nor maiden could dance any
longer. Nor were the horses forgotten, which had
worked so hard during the harvest-month, for they on
that night had each an extra feed of corn.</p>

<p>On this particular occasion, when the supper was well
over, and Tom Treddle, the fiddler, had just got into the
swing of his first tune, Will White, the miller, of
Smeaton, drew my father aside into a corner, and began
to talk to him.</p>

<p>“I am afraid, Master Dale,” said Will, “that you are
going to have trouble;” and he nodded his head in the
direction of the woods that bound our farm.</p>

<p>“What is it, Will?” asked my father.</p>

<p>“Why, certainly,” answered the miller, “ ’tis none of
my business, and maybe I ought not to meddle with it.
But you see my nearest way from home to your place
here, Master Dale, lies across the fields. Now, as I came
along to-night, I saw that Rupert Watson has turned out
his horses into that piece of land which he says is his,
and which you say is yours. So therefore I say, I fear
there will be trouble.”</p>

<p>“Trouble there will be!” answered my father. “And
I am sorry for it, for the old sore has lain unopened
these fifty years, and should have healed for what I
would have done. But Rupert Watson must not turn
his cattle on my land. Well, join the dancers, good
Will, and I will consider what’s to be done.”</p>

<p>Now, it was not easy to decide upon a course of action,
because there was sure to be trouble, whatever conduct
were pursued. For if my father patiently suffered
Rupert Watson’s horses to occupy the land, it would
amount to an acknowledgment that the land was not
ours; and if, on the other hand, he drove them away,
there would be resistance on the part of the Watsons,
and then would come fighting. However, by the time
the dancers had all tired, and the folks were nearly all
gone home, my father had made up his mind. So he
called up to him Jacob Trusty and Timothy Grass and
Reuben Larkspur, and all our regular labourers, ten
men and youths in all, and began to talk to them in
the barn. “Lads,” said he, “ye know that there is a
strip of meadow-land lying between Watson’s estate and
mine which we both claim? Mine I believe it to be,
else I would not claim it. It hath always been
understood to be mine, as Jacob here will tell you.”</p>

<p>“Dale’s land it was, and is, and always will be,” said
Jacob.</p>

<p>“Well,” continued my father, “for fifty years the matter
has been quiet, but Rupert Watson has seen fit to break
the peace at last. To-night he has turned his horses
into the land in question, thinking, no doubt, that our
merry-making would prevent us from noticing the matter.
However, Miller White saw them, and told me of it.
Now, I am not going to allow Rupert Watson’s horses to
feed on my lands. Nor will I simply turn them out. I
will take such measures as will lead, I doubt not, to a
final settlement of this matter. What say you, Jacob?”</p>

<p>“It hath gone on long enough,” said Jacob. “Let it
be settled and done with.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis good counsel. Now, lads, there are ten of ye,
and I make eleven. Take each of ye a good stout staff,
lest we be attacked, and then follow me, and we will take
Rupert Watson’s horses, and put them into pound at
Darrington. Then he will have to settle with the pinder
ere he can regain them, and if he likes to take the law
of me, he is welcome.”</p>

<p>So the men, with much approval, went for their staves,
and prepared to carry out my father’s wishes.</p>

<p>Now, as it happened, Parson Drumbleforth had gone
home a good three hours before that, but Jack had
remained to sleep at our house, and he and I had lurked
in a dark corner of the barn to hear what my father
said to the men. When we heard of the proposed expedition
against Rupert Watson’s horses, nothing would
content us but that we must go; and knowing that if we
asked leave we should not get it, we waited till all had
left the barn, and then ran away into the fields, and hid
under a hedge until my father and his men came along,
behind whom we followed in the moonlight until we
reached the debatable strip of land, and saw the horses,
twelve in number, cropping the grass. We had expected
that some spy would have been sent by Rupert Watson
to watch over the horses, in case of an attack; but he,
fancying we should all be busy with the harvest-supper,
had left them alone, and our men had no difficulty in
surrounding them and driving them away. Then Jack
and I ran home as hard as possible, and had only just
retired to bed when my father came in to tell my mother
that the younger men had taken the horses to the pinfold
at Darrington.</p>

<p>The next day passed away peacefully enough with us,
but towards night came one from Darrington, who told
us that at noon Rupert Watson had ridden up in a great
passion, and had demanded his horses of the pinder,
and threatened all manner of violence against those who
had impounded them. To whom the pinder, being in
the right, and having the law behind him, made answer
that he knew nought of the rights or wrongs of the
dispute ’twixt Dales and Watsons, but that the horses
being come into his pound, should not go thence until
the pinning-fee were paid. Which fee Rupert Watson
was forced in the end to disburse, and so departed,
vowing vengeance on us Dales root and branch. When
my mother heard this she was troubled, but my father
bade her be of good cheer.</p>

<p>On the Saturday morning, I accompanied my father
to market, my mother staying at home, which, as events
proved, was a fortunate thing, for she would have been
sore put about by the scene which followed our arrival
in the market-place. It was rather late when we reached
the town, and, after putting up our horse and cart, went
into the street to do our business, and the frequenters
of the market were already gathered in full force about
the Butter Cross and the Beast Fair. My father had
said, as we came along, that he should probably have
some words with Rupert Watson if they met, and I was
therefore on the look-out for our enemy, but for a long
time I saw nothing of him. In such a small place, however,
we were bound to meet him, and meet him we did,
as we went to dine at the ordinary. For there he stood
on the steps of the inn, a tall, dark-faced man, with a
look of anger and hatred on his countenance, which
reminded me of his son Dennis.</p>

<p>Rupert Watson saw us coming along the street, and I
saw him square himself so as to fill the doorway of the
inn. There were some twenty or thirty farmers standing
round, and they, knowing what had taken place, looked
on with much curiosity as my father drew near.</p>

<p>“Keep by me, Will,” said my father; “thou shalt come
to no harm—nor shall I, for that matter.”</p>

<p>When we were a few yards from him, Rupert Watson
broke out upon my father in a loud voice, so that men
came running along the market-place and from the
shambles to see who it was that caused such a commotion.</p>

<p>“So, Master Dale!” shouted Rupert Watson; “so you
dare to show your face here after your work t’other
night! It were better, perhaps, that you were in gaol
for a horse-thief. A pretty jest, to steal another’s cattle
and clap them into pound! An you and your men had
not been drunk with your rioting, I would take the law
of you!”</p>

<p>Then my father stood squarely in front of him, and
looked Rupert Watson in the face. “Master Watson,”
said he, “when you talk of jest and riot, I understand
you not. What I do understand is this that you turned
your horses upon my land, from whence I removed them
to the parish pound. And I warn you, Master Watson,
in the presence of these gentlemen, that this I shall do
again if ever you offend in like manner.”</p>

<p>Then the cloud on Rupert Watson’s face grew black
indeed, and he poured upon my father a torrent of
vulgar abuse. “Thy land!” quoth he. “Land of thine
or thy fathers it never was. And I will turn my cattle
upon it this night, and if thou, or any of thy men, dare
to set foot upon the land, I will shoot the trespassers
through the head!”</p>

<p>“Master Watson,” said my father, “I care nothing for
your threats. What I can do for myself, I will do;
what I cannot do, the law shall do for me.”</p>

<p>“Ay, ay,” said someone in the crowd; “law is a
good word. Your two families have disputed this matter
for generations; why not go to law and have done with
it?”</p>

<p>“As for shooting of men through the head,” said
another, “ ’tis poor talk, and I trow the magistrates
would have somewhat to say to it.”</p>

<p>“Who asked thy counsel?” said Rupert Watson. “A
man hath a right to defend his own, hath he not? The
land, I say, is mine.”</p>

<p>“I neither know nor care whose the land is,” said an
old farmer at our elbow; “but this I do know, Rupert,
that thou hast never put cattle on it since Castle Hill
came into thy hands. Why hast suddenly fallen in love
with it? ’Tis but an acre or two at most.”</p>

<p>“The land, I say, is mine,” said Rupert Watson once
more. “And mine it shall be. So look to yourself,
William Dale, for if I find you or yours setting foot
upon it I will shoot you, I say, as I would a dog!”</p>

<p>“I care not for your threatening, Master Watson,”
answered my father. “You may take your own course.
But if ever I find cattle of yours on my land again, into
the parish pound they will go. And now stand aside,
and let me and my lad pass.”</p>

<p>And therewith he strode up on a sudden, and Rupert
Watson, with one glance at his great form and determined
face, slunk out of the doorway, and we went
inside the inn and dined at the ordinary. And while we
were dining I saw Rupert Watson enter, and retire into
a corner with a little person whose manners reminded
me of a weasel. My father told me this was Lawyer
Sharpe, of Wakefield.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis the most unscrupulous attorney that ever lived,
Will, boy,” said my father, “and I doubt not he and
Watson are contriving some scheme against me, which
they are welcome to do. I care for nothing of their
invention.”</p>

<p>It was vastly to my liking that most of those to whom
we spoke that day sided with my father, and condemned
Rupert Watson, both for turning out his horses on the
debatable piece of land, and likewise for creating a
disturbance at the inn door. For though no man, not
even the oldest, could rightly say if the land belonged to
Dales or to Watsons, they yet remembered that for fifty
years the trouble had been allowed to rest, and that it
was now revived through no fault of my father’s.</p>

<p>“Rupert Watson,” said the old farmer who had spoken
at the inn door, “is in the wrong this time. Let
sleeping dogs lie, say I. Now he has stirred the dog up,
and must not complain if it show its teeth. But mind you,
Master Dale, I know not if the land be yours or his.”</p>

<p>“It has always been held to be ours in our family,”
said my father.</p>

<p>“Ay, marry, and to be theirs in their family. My
advice is, go to law, if ye can settle it in no different
fashion. Though law is but a parlous method of
deciding a question like yon. Whether ye lose or win,
the lawyers will have your money.”</p>

<p>“It is for him to decide,” said my father; “I shall do
nothing—only this, that if he sends his cattle on the
land again, I shall again put them into pound.”</p>

<p>So we went home that Saturday, and that evening,
and for many a following evening, strict watch was kept
upon the narrow strip of meadow-land, for my father
was determined that every inch of his acres should
be protected. But Rupert Watson made no further
movement, and the weeks passed by till it was October,
and we heard no more of the matter.</p>

<p>Nevertheless our enemy—for I can call him by no
other name, considering his deeds—was not idle in his
efforts to vex and annoy us. For one Saturday, early in
October, as I was talking to Jacob Trusty in the fold,
there came riding in at our gate a man on a brown
mare, whose face was strange to both of us, and who
immediately hailed us with an inquiry if this were Dale’s
Field. I said “Yes;” whereupon he consulted a paper
which he drew from his vest, and then asked if William
Dale were about, to which I answered that my father
was at market, and would not be home until five or six
o’clock.</p>

<p>“Then I must needs get off my horse, lad,” said the
stranger, “and wait his return. Dost think a feed of
corn could be found for my horse? He has carried me
four-and-twenty miles this morning, and needs a rest.”</p>

<p>I handed the horse over to one of our lads, and conducted
the stranger into the house, where he was
received by my mother, to whom he made a very polite
bow.</p>

<p>“Master Dale, mistress, is not at home, I understand,
but will return anon. With your permission I will rest
myself until he comes, for I cannot go away until I have
seen him. I am a sheriff’s officer, and have a writ
to serve upon him at the suit of one Rupert Watson.”</p>

<p>So it seemed that our enemy was going to have the
law of us after all.</p>

<h2>VII</h2>

<h3>OF OUR COMING FROM YORK</h3>

<p>My mother, woman-like, was somewhat disturbed at the
idea of having aught to do with law matters, and she
looked exceedingly grave when the sheriff’s officer
announced his mission. But my father, coming home a
little later, made light of the matter, and bade the man
sit down and eat and drink, and conversed with him on
the weather and similar matters, so that the bearer of
Rupert Watson’s writ presently departed much fortified
in mind and body.</p>

<p>“It is the best thing that could have happened,” said
my father, talking to my mother about the matter, “for
now the question will be decided and done with. If the
law says the land is mine, mine it will be for ever; if
’tis Rupert Watson’s, then the law will say so. And
perhaps the old enmity between us will die out. I have
no wish to live in strife with any man.”</p>

<p>“For all that,” said my mother, “you will never be
friendly with Rupert Watson. For he has a bad heart,
and is a cruel man, and with such I am sure you will
never agree.”</p>

<p>“Friends, perhaps not,” answered my father. “But it
might come to us exchanging a good-day like Christians,
instead of riding by on the high-road as if we were sworn
enemies. However, if this matter be settled, our children
may live at peace, and even friendship, if Rupert and I
never do.”</p>

<p>Now, I knew that could never be, because Dennis had
sworn that he would hate me for ever, and I knew he
meant it. Nothing, I felt sure, would ever make Dennis
forgive me for thrashing him, and I, on my part, felt no
desire to make friends with him. I had an instinctive
dislike for Dennis, and felt that oil and water would mix
sooner than he and I. However, I said nothing of this
to my father or mother.</p>

<p>When Jacob Trusty heard of the law proceedings, he
exercised much thought upon the matter, and often
discussed it with me of a Saturday afternoon.</p>

<p>“That the land is ours,” said Jacob Trusty, “is certain,
and yet it would sore puzzle and moyther my head to
give good reason for thinking so. Thy great-grandfather
and thy grandfather, William, always claimed that land,
and thy father claimed it after them. But then the
grandfather of this black-faced Watson likewise claimed
it. Wherefore the difficulty was the same in those days.
Ah! many a bloody head there hath been over that strip
of meadow-land. For sixty years ago either Dale or
Watson was for ever driving cattle on it; and if it were
a Dale, then a Watson came forth and drove them off;
and if it were a Watson, he had to reckon with a Dale;
and first there were words, and then there were blows,
and then there was a stiff fight, and if there were no
heads broken, ’twas not for want of hard hitting.
Howbeit, in thy grandfather’s time and in thy father’s
matters have been quiet and peaceable.”</p>

<p>“Shall we win the day, do you think, Jacob?” I asked.</p>

<p>“Nay, lad, who can tell? One thing I can tell thee
without doubt, and that is, that the men who will profit
by this matter are the lawyers. Whether thy father win
or lose, or Rupert Watson lose or win, the lawyers will
fill their pockets. Wherefore, William, boy, as thou
goest through the world, mark one thing, namely, that
whenever two men fall out, there will always be a third
man whose interest it will be to keep up the strife. For
while John and Thomas are disputing as to which of
them shall have the egg, Richard comes up and eats it
out of hand. Such is law, out of which thou wilt do
well to keep.”</p>

<p>Nevertheless, it was necessary that my father should
employ the services of an attorney, and he therefore placed
his case in the hands of Lawyer Hook, who had managed
all his difficult matters for many years. Mr. Hook was
considerably exercised in his own mind over this dispute
’twixt the Dales and Watsons, for he could not lay his
hands on anything which served to decide the matter in
our favour. Neither was he able to see how judge and
jury could settle the matter. “For indeed, Master Dale,”
said he, having ridden over one afternoon to talk with
my father, “the evidence for and against is as conflicting
as any I ever knew. You say on your side that your
family hath always claimed the land, and you bring half
a score of ancient gaffers and gammers to say the same.
Now, Rupert Watson saith that it hath always been
matter of certainty in his family that the land is theirs,
and he too bringeth various old folk to support him.
However, we shall, maybe, find light somewhere. In
any case, I fear it will cost you a pretty penny, and
unless you have some great love for the land—’tis, I
understand, but a narrow strip—I would let it go.”</p>

<p>But my father would not hear of that. He had no
mind to throw away his money in law, but he would not
yield a yard of the land his fathers had left him. He
must fight Rupert Watson on this point, whatever it
cost.</p>

<p>A few nights after that we were sitting round the fire
in my mother’s parlour, and my father was telling us of
some incident at the market, from which he had just
come, when one of our maids came in and said that
Jacob Trusty was in the kitchen, and wanted to speak
to the master. My father would have risen and gone to
him, but just then Jacob himself appeared and stood
within the doorway, having first pushed the girl out and
closed the door.</p>

<p>“Master and mistress,” said Jacob, “there are some
things best said without hearers, so I make bold to come
in here where are no lads and lasses to hear us, save
only your own, which have a right to hear all.”</p>

<p>“Sit down, Jacob,” said my father. “Say thy say, man.”</p>

<p>Jacob, however, remained standing, leaning on his
thick staff. “Master,” said he, “I have been thinking
about this matter of the land. Also the other day
Lawyer Hook met me on the turnpike, and asked me
some questions, and I could see that he had little
confidence. Now it came to me to ask you if there are no
papers. Papers always go with land, so I’ve heard.”</p>

<p>“Whatever I have, Jacob, are with Mr. Hook,” said
my father. “And old as they are, they are no good on
this point.”</p>

<p>“That brings me to what I want to say,” said Jacob.
“I served your grandfather first when I was a lad ten
years old. There were four of us, Tom Hodge, Anthony
Boone, Dick Simpson, and myself, all slept in that
chamber against the apple loft. There was an old chest
in that chamber full of books and papers, and as never a
one of us could read we used to wonder at them. Why
not look in there, master?”</p>

<p>“The box is still there,” said my mother.</p>

<p>“But the papers were taken out when I was a lad,”
said my father. “Mr. Hook has them now. However,
’tis good counsel, Jacob, and I’ll look in the box again.”</p>

<p>While Jacob went into the kitchen to drink a mug of
ale, my father told me to get a candle and accompany
him upstairs to the chamber mentioned, which was quite
in accordance with my desires. So we ascended to the
chamber, which was in a remote corner of the house,
and had long been given up to the storing away of
ancient lumber. Thus there was in it old saddles of
curious fashion, and rusty bits and stirrup-irons, together
with quaintly-carved chairs, broken and whole, and many
other odds and ends accumulated in a house which has
stood the brunt of some three hundred years. Amidst
this mass of dust-covered lumber stood the oak chest
spoken of by Jacob Trusty.</p>

<p>“It is empty, I fear, Will,” said my father, pulling it
into the middle of the floor; “but we will examine it to
please old Jacob, who means well. Ah! you see there is
nothing at all in it.”</p>

<p>Nor was there, as far as we could see, for the interior
was bare and empty, save for a thick coat of dust. I
looked at the ancient chest curiously, holding the candle
where the light would fall on its quaint carvings and the
grotesque figures on the ends.</p>

<p>“My great-grandfather kept his papers and valuables
in this chest, Will,” said my father. “See, here are
drawers to put money in. And there is a secret drawer.
See if thou canst find it, lad.”</p>

<p>But I could not, and did not make out where it was
until my father drew out a drawer which had a false
bottom, and this being removed, a small receptacle was
laid bare.</p>

<p>“It is not very large,” said my father, “but it sufficed
to store anything especially worth the keeping.”</p>

<p>Having admired the ingenious manner of the contrivance,
I essayed to put the drawer in its place again,
but found that it would not fit into the cavity prepared
for it. Something seemed to lie in the way, and prevent
the drawer from fitting properly. Putting my hand into
the hole to discover the reason, my fingers encountered
a thin packet of paper which I immediately drew out and
held up to my father’s wondering gaze.</p>

<p>“What is this, lad?” said he. “Papers? They must
have been placed in the secret drawer or behind it, and
slipped underneath. ’Tis an ancient-looking packet, too.”</p>

<p>That indeed it was, for the cover was yellow with age,
and the handwriting upon it was of such an ancient
fashion that neither my father nor myself could decipher
it. So we carried it downstairs, and having called Jacob
Trusty into the parlour to see what his counsel had
procured for us, my mother took the packet to see what she
could make out of it. Having stripped off the cover, she
found some large papers with seals attached to them, but
despite her clerkship she could make naught out of any
of them, save that on the margin of one there was somewhat
written which appeared to be of more recent date
than the body of the writing. This, after some pains, she
made out to be as follows: “Ye cloase lying next to
Wattson’s land at Castle Hill ys myne by this deede.
W. D. 1510.” Which we took to show that one of our
ancestors at least had something more than supposition
to rest on when claiming the narrow strip of land. My
father fastened up the papers again, and having charged
us all to say nothing to anyone about them, the next day
he carried them over to Lawyer Hook, and told him how
we had come across them. Lawyer Hook, after having
with much labour read various of the papers, and
particularly the one bearing the marginal note, was much
pleased, and informed my father that we now had a
perfect case, and should give Masters Watson and Sharpe
such a surprise as they had not reckoned for.</p>

<p>“For this deed, Master Dale,” said he, “proves that in
the reign of Henry the Seventh the Watson of that day
did sell to the then William Dale this bit of land in
exchange for three acres of land which had belonged to
your yeomanry, but was somewhat inconvenient of access
to you, but easily come at by him. So now rest content,
Master Dale, and say naught to anyone of this, and let
Sharpe gather together what evidence he can, and when
we are called on for our defence, we will produce our
deed, and come away from the Assizes victorious.”</p>

<p>So the time went by until December, and in the second
week of that month the judges came to hold the Assize
at York, and it was necessary for my father to attend.
Now, he had made me a promise just before the dispute
with Rupert Watson, that the next time business took
him to York he would carry me with him, so that I might
see the great city and its Minster. You may be sure that
I neglected not to remind him of his promise, now that I
knew he was bound to go to York. And though it yet
wanted a fortnight of the holidays, he stood to his word,
and begged leave of Dr. Parsons to take me away from
school earlier than usual, which leave the doctor granted
when he heard whither we were bound.</p>

<p>On the 14th day of December, then, we set out for
York, my father mounted on his brown mare and I riding
Dumpling. We had but twenty-four miles to travel, and
I was much set up at the prospect of riding along the
Great North Road and forming one of the never-ceasing
procession which was continually passing and repassing
to or from London and York. So we said good-bye to
my mother and Lucy and rode away, and having dined
at Sherburn, which lies almost half-way between Dale’s
Field and York, we journeyed forward to the city in the
afternoon, and arrived there long ere darkness had set in.
As I had never seen York before, I was much impressed
by my first sight of that fair and beautiful city, which
lies like a jewel in the midst of the rolling meadows and
moors of Yorkshire, and I could do naught else but
admire and wonder at its various sights. First, there
was the Minster, which struck me with the most profound
astonishment, being of such immensity in size and conception,
that our church at home, though a fine one,
seemed quite small in comparison. Then there were the
city walls and the bars, through which we passed to
enter the town, with their portcullises and guards and
spikes over the towers, on which still stood the grisly
heads of some that had been executed awhile before.
And though the Minster seemed vast enough to hold all
the people in the county, there were churches everywhere,
some of them of exceeding great age. What with the
Minster, and the churches, and the city walls, and the
fine houses and people, I was thrown into a whirl of
amazement, which did but increase the next day when
Lawyer Hook conducted us to the Castle, where the
Assizes were opened, and it was necessary for us to
attend. There did I first behold the majesty of the law,
and saw a judge sitting on the bench in scarlet robes
and ermine, with many lawyers before him arguing and
disputing, and the twelve honest men in the jury-box
wondering which was right and which wrong. Now,
indeed, I need say little about our case, which was not
called for some three days after we had reached York,
there being many matters to deal with before we could
be attended to. When it came on at last it was speedily
over, for when Rupert Watson’s side had put before
judge and jury all they knew or could invent, our counsel
produced the ancient deed, and the matter was settled,
and the land ours for ever without dispute. And the
judge having said some sharp words about hastily
rushing into litigation, ordered Rupert Watson to pay
all the costs we had been put to, the business was over,
and we were free to go where we pleased. I could have
well done to stay awhile in York and see more of the
city at my leisure, but my father was anxious to reach
home and tell my mother of our success. So having
dined at our inn and paid the score for ourselves and our
beasts, we mounted the latter and set out homewards,
well pleased with the result of our journey.</p>

<p>It was well on into the afternoon when we left York,
and having paused awhile at Sherburn to give the horses
a feed, the darkness came on suddenly, and speedily
surrounded us. This by itself was no great matter, for
the brown mare and Dumpling could both have taken
their way homeward blindfold. But as Providence ruled
it, there came upon us a heavy snowstorm as we descended
the hill from Bryam into Ferrybridge, and this confused
our cattle, so that progress was slow, Dumpling in
particular objecting to the snow, which drove right against
us as we pressed along and made our faces tingle with
its sharpness. However, we gained Ferrybridge, and
after a short stay there entered upon the last three miles
of our journey, it being then eight o’clock in the evening
and the snow coming down faster than ever.</p>

<p>Now, the road ’twixt Ferrybridge and Darrington is a
lonely one, and never over-pleasant to ride along at any
time of night. There were no carriages or coaches going
along on this night, and we met nothing but a post-chaise
going north. The snow increased at every step,
and the beasts beneath us groaned with their efforts to
keep their footing and persevere on their homeward
way.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a wild night, Will,” said my father, who rode on
my right hand; “and thy mother will be anxious for us.
We shall be home in half an hour an we keep at it.
Shake Dumpling up, lad; she is half afraid of the snow,
and will—”</p>

<p>I never knew what more my father would have said.
As he spoke, a figure seemed to rise up out of the storm
right in our path. I heard a sharp report of firearms and
saw the flash. My father fell from his horse without
even a groan.</p>

<h2>VIII</h2>

<h3>OF THE SORROW THAT CAME AFTER</h3>

<p>I was too much horrified by the sudden attack upon my
father to cry out or even to move. I sat for what seemed
an age without even drawing my breath. Dumpling
quivered beneath me; I heard the mare shaking at her
side. It seemed to me like some awful dream, from
which I should presently awake to find myself in my
little sleeping-chamber at Dale’s Field. And then I
suddenly realized the horror that had come to overwhelm
me and mine, and my heart seemed to burst into one
terrible cry.</p>

<p>“Father, oh, father!”</p>

<p>Alas! there was no response. Trembling with fear I
got down from Dumpling’s back and felt my way through
the darkness to the mare’s bridle. She was shivering
and quaking all over, and pushed her nose against my
arm as if to ask protection. I fastened her by the bridle
to Dumpling and bade them stand still. Poor brutes!
what with the storm and the sudden attack they were
thoroughly cowed and affrighted, and they huddled
together and held their heads to the ground, as beasts
only will when they are completely yielded up to fear.
And then I began to search about in the snow, and
presently stumbled over my father’s body.</p>

<p>He was dead—I knew that as soon as I touched him.
I knew it by the awful stillness that lay over him, by
the perfectly rigid manner in which his tall form was
extended on the snow. I laid my hands on him, on his
face, breast, arms, and suddenly felt them bathed in
something that ran fast and warm from his heart. And
the touch of his blood overwhelmed me, and thinking of
my mother waiting for us at home, and of Lucy and
myself without a father, I broke down and threw my
arms about him, and sobbed like any girl, while the
poor beasts at my side sniffed at me and seemed to
sorrow with my sorrow.</p>

<p>And then all of a sudden I sprang to my feet with a
mad fierce thought newborn in my heart. My father
had been murdered! This was no ordinary highway
affair, no stoppage of unoffending travellers by
highwayman or footpad. The man who had come upon us out
of the darkness had discharged his deadly weapon
and fled away as swiftly as he came. He had not
waited to rob and plunder, as he might well have done
for aught that I, a lad, could have done to prevent him.
It was no murder for the sake of spoil, but committed
out of hatred and envy. And in all the world my father
had but one enemy, and that was Rupert Watson. It
must have been his hand that had shot my father down;
it could be none but his. And with this conviction
strong in mind I knelt down in the snow and laid my
hand on my dead father’s breast again, and swore
solemnly never to rest until I had brought his murderer
to a fitting end.</p>

<p>When I looked up again, perplexed as to what I must
do next, I saw a light drawing near along the road from
Ferrybridge. From the way in which it danced up and
down in the darkness I took it to be carried by a horse-man.
I raised my voice and shouted loudly through the
storm, and presently two men, cloaked to the chin, came
cautiously up and turned the light upon me as I stood in
the way, with the still figure behind me and the horses
smelling at it in fear and wonder.</p>

<p>“God’s mercy!” said one, “what is this? Here seems
foul work.”</p>

<p>They were looking past me at the group behind.</p>

<p>“Sir,” I cried, “my father is dead—murdered! We
were coming home from York-a man rode up to us here—he
fired—my father fell—he is dead, dead!”</p>

<p>Before I had finished they were off their horses, and
one was kneeling in the snow at my father’s side. The
other turned the lantern’s light upon his dead face. I
turned away; it was more than I could bear, to see that.</p>

<p>“He is dead,” said the first. “He has been shot
through the heart. A foul business. Somehow, me-thinks
I know him.”</p>

<p>“It is William Dale.” I said. “William Dale of Dale’s
Field.”</p>

<p>“And thou art my little friend Will,” said he, rising
from his knees. “I thought I knew thee, poor Will.
What, dost not remember me?”</p>

<p>Then I looked at him and saw that it was Philip Lisle.
He laid his hand on my head, and patted it affectionately.</p>

<p>“Poor lad, poor lad!” said he. “I would we could
have had a merrier meeting. This man, Will, where
went he after he had fired upon thy father?”</p>

<p>“I cannot say,” I answered. He seemed to ride upon
us all in a moment, and I saw his pistol flash, and by
the light of it he was a tall man on a great horse, but
he was gone as quick as the flash when it was over.”</p>

<p>“What! stayed he not to rob? Then, Will, this is no
common murder. Thy father, had he any enemies?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, one, and one only—Rupert Watson, of
Castle Hill.”</p>

<p>“Ah! I have heard somewhat of that old dispute.
Lad, doubt not that whoever hath killed thy father will
be punished in the end. And now let us see how we
can get him home. Where is the nearest house?”</p>

<p>“There is a farmstead across the fields, I answered.
“We can get a cart there.”</p>

<p>“Then go there with me, Will, and my friend Captain
Ready here will keep watch over thy father till we return.
Stay, let us lift him to the hedge-side. Steady, Jack,
thou and I have strong arms. Poor William Dale, ’tis
a sad end for him, but I had rather be he than his slayer.
And now for this farmstead.”</p>

<p>So we ploughed our way across the field, leaving
Philip Lisle’s companion watching by my father, and
after some difficulty we procured a cart, and a man to
drive it, and returned, and the men lifted the body in,
and we set off along the turnpike in the direction of
Dale’s Field, I riding Dumpling and leading the mare
by the bridle. At first as we went along Philip Lisle
and Captain Ready conversed in low whispers, but
presently the former came over to me and laid his hand
on my arm.</p>

<p>“Will,” said Philip Lisle, “someone must needs ride
forward and break this bad news to thy poor mother.
What think you, Will, shall we leave him with Ready
and ride onward? It will be well for her to have thee
at hand when she hears this sad matter.”</p>

<p>So we rode forward through the falling snow, and the
cart came rumbling after us with Captain Ready riding
at the side. And as we rode along I could say nothing
at all. I knew naught, and saw naught. Only there
was a mist of red all about me and a fierce, burning
desire to lay hands upon the murderer who had robbed
me of a father and my mother of her husband. It was
late when we reached the open gate at Dale’s Field and
rode through it into the fold. In the house they heard
our horses’ feet; the door opened, warmth and light
came through it from the cheery kitchen. I saw my
mother standing in the open doorway to welcome us,
and Lucy peeped out from behind her gown, and beyond
them was Jacob Trusty holding a mug of ale in his hand.
And at the sight of the old familiar place the tears came
rolling fast and hot and very bitter from my eyes.</p>

<p>“Be brave, Will,” whispered Philip Lisle. “Be brave,
lad. Remember thy mother and be a man.”</p>

<p>We advanced into the light. My mother came a step
forward to meet us with a cry of joy at our return. And
then she suddenly stopped, for she caught sight of Philip
Lisle’s face where she had expected to see her husband’s.
And at that I could bear it no longer, but ran forward
and threw my arms about her, and burst into such tears
as I had never shed before and have never shed since.</p>

<p>“Will! “she said. “Will! what is it, my dear? Your
father?”</p>

<p>“Oh, mother, mother, mother!” was all I could say.</p>

<p>I felt her arms suddenly tighten about me, and I
knew she was looking at Philip Lisle.</p>

<p>“Madam,” said Philip Lisle. “Madam—”</p>

<p>“Speak out, sir,” she said, “there is some evil happened.
Tell me all, I pray you.”</p>

<p>“God in heaven knows, madam,” said he, “I would
have suffered aught rather than bring you this news. I
pray you be brave to endure it.”</p>

<p>“I am brave, sir,” she answered. “Tell me it all. My
husband—is he dead?”</p>

<p>But Philip Lisle could say no more. He bowed his
head and turned away to hide his own emotion.
My mother took the fearful blow bravely. She went
indoors and sat down, still holding me in her arms and
striving to comfort me. Never to the day of my death
shall I forget that scene. My mother sat by the fire,
and I leaned my head against her, striving to keep down
the great sobs that seemed like to choke me, and Lucy
had stolen up and was weeping softly at my mother’s
side, and before us at the table stood Jacob Trusty, still
holding his mug of ale, and one of the maids stood
behind him, and the doorway into the back kitchen was
filled with the scared faces of the ploughmen and boys,
and through the door into the parlour I could see the
table set with prodigal fulness in anticipation of our
return. And in the middle of the kitchen stood Philip
Lisle, his long black cloak spangled with snowflakes.</p>

<p>At last my mother raised her head and looked at him.
“Tell me how it came about,” she said, in a calm, steady
voice that frightened me, because it seemed so unnatural
at that time. “Tell me, sir.”</p>

<p>But Philip Lisle shook his head and pointed to me.
“Your son, madam, can best do that. Take him inside
and let him tell you his news, and suffer me to make
some preparations, for they are bringing Master Dale
here and will soon arrive.”</p>

<p>And so we went into the parlour, and as soon as I
could I told my mother all the sad story. And yet she
could not weep, but held my hands between her own,
and sometimes they gripped mine tightly, and sometimes
they were hot and then cold, and there was a look came
into her eyes and in her face which I had never seen
there before. But soon they called for her instructions,
and she had to go about and give orders, and presently
came Captain Ready with the cart, and they carried my
father across his own threshold, and— But of that
night I will write no more.</p>

<p>When it was noised abroad the next day that William
Dale had been foully murdered on the highway between
Ferrybridge and Darrington, there was such a commotion
in the neighbourhood as no one ever remembered.
Philip Lisle and his friend Ready had remained at the
inn at Darrington, and they were questioned on all sides.
As for our house, it was besieged all day, for my
mother’s friends came from neighbouring villages, and
men on horseback rode up to inquire if the bad news
were true, and Parson Drumbleforth walked over early
in the morning to comfort my mother. I think that all
of us would have been happier if my mother had broken
down and wept, but she maintained a calm spirit; only
those who knew could see from her white face and fixed
eyes that she was suffering more than anyone could
imagine. Nevertheless, she kept her sorrow down, and
comforted me and Lucy, and made arrangements for
the burying of my father’s body, and did things so
thoroughly that all admired her bravery.</p>

<p>“Nevertheless, lad,” said Jacob Trusty, who was talking
with me on the second day, “I like not to see it, for ’tis
not natural. If she would cry now, it would be a
comfort and a thing to praise God for. I pray she may
break down when they take him away. For it is a bad
thing, William, boy, to keep one’s grief bottled up as it
were. ’Tis like a dove which you may prison in a cage,
and which will make no murmur, but will die silently.
Howbeit, she will feel it badly when they fasten him up
for burial.”</p>

<p>Jacob had felt my father’s death very keenly. When
I could bear it he had taken me on one side and asked
me the manner of it, and I had told him all I could
think of. Jacob’s face grew grave and thoughtful as he
listened, and he shook his head often.</p>

<p>“What do you think of it, Jacob?” I said at last.</p>

<p>“Nay, lad, nay, what can I think? Thy father had
but one enemy in all the world. See how befriended
he was! Have they not been here this past two days,
gentle and simple, high and low, so that the doorstep
hath never cooled of them? Hast hearkened how they
praised him, how all had a good word for him? Nay,
weep not, William, lad. Be proud that all men thought
so well of thy poor father. But, William, one man hath
not come, and only one of all the neighbourhood.”</p>

<p>“You mean Rupert Watson?”</p>

<p>Jacob nodded his gray head. “Ay,” said he, “him I
do mean. Certainly, seeing that they had never been
friends, and had lately had extra cause of unpleasantness,
it might seem strange to some if Rupert Watson had
come here. But I can remember that when thy grandfather
died this Watson’s father was bidden to the
funeral and came like a Christian. But this one stays
aside, and hath never sent word of sympathy.”</p>

<p>“Jacob,” I said, “do you think it was Rupert Watson
who did it?”</p>

<p>“I know not, lad—I know not. Let it be.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” I said, “that I will not. If he killed my father
I will fasten it on him and kill him.”</p>

<p>“Whisht, lad, whisht!” said Jacob Trusty. “Thou art
too young to talk of killing. Rest assured that whoever
killed thy father will be sorry enow for it. For there
was never crime done in this world, lad, that did not
come home to the doer. It may be long first, but come
it will.”</p>

<p>I had to tell all I knew about the manner of my
father’s death to the coroner and his jury, and they
examined me at great length, and with me Philip Lisle
and his friend Captain Ready. But there was nothing
in our testimony that was clear, and they gave in a
verdict that my father was murdered by some unknown
person, and there was an end of it. And two days after
that we buried him in the churchyard at Darrington,
and there was such a throng of folk as I had never seen
before, people coming from far and near to pay their
respects to his memory. And Lucy and I went and
followed after the coffin, and the people said kind things
to us, but my mother stayed at home. Ah me! without
him the house seemed shorn of all its light and life, and
when we came back from the funeral and I realized that
I never should again see him or hear him, never again
touch his hand, or learn from him, I broke down utterly,
and went to my mother’s side and laid my head on her
knee and wept my heart out. And presently I felt her
hot tears drop on my face, and so at last she wept and
relieved her heart and was somewhat comforted.</p>

<p>Now, after my father had been buried, men began to
talk of the manner of his death and to ask questions and
give opinions. And knowing that he had but one
enemy, and that enemy a man over whom he had just
achieved a triumph, there were not wanting those who
hinted in broad fashion that it was Rupert Watson who
had slain my father, out of hatred and revenge. And
little by little men began to look darkly upon him when
they met him in high-road or market-place, and some
would hardly speak to him, and even his associates
looked fearfully at him. So patent did these things
become that he could not fail to notice them, for, indeed,
people began to shun him as they would the plague.</p>

<p>But Rupert Watson was not the man to patiently
suffer this, and setting us down as the originators of
the feeling against him, he rode over one afternoon and
drew rein at our door, and knocked thereon. And my
mother having caught sight of him went out herself,
and I followed, my heart beating against my ribs until
it was like to burst.</p>

<p>“How now, dame!” said he, looking angry and black
at us; “what is this that you are saying of me? Think
you I have naught to do but slay men o’ nights? I
would have you know that there is law for those that set
malicious reports abroad.”</p>

<p>Then my mother looked straight at him. “Master
Watson,” she said, “I have set no reports abroad, nor
shall I. I know not who killed my dear husband. But
I am very sure, Master Watson, that not all the sorrow
and pain which I and these children have suffered will
equal one tithe of the sorrow that God will bring down
on the head of his murderer.”</p>

<p>And therewith she went inside and closed the door,
and Rupert Watson rode out of the yard with his head
bent down, looking, said one of our maids, as if he had
seen a spirit.</p>

<h2>IX</h2>

<h3>OF THE PASSAGE OF MANY YEARS</h3>

<p>After that time many years came and went and brought
nothing of moment with them. It seemed, indeed, to
me that however the great world’s affairs might go,
naught disturbed us at Dale’s Field, where the seasons
travelled round with monotonous regularity. Now it
was winter and now spring, and with the latter came
fresh flowers and the bleating of lambs, and summer
followed only to be driven forth by apple-cheeked
autumn, and so the year completed its cycle, and was in
its turn compelled to give way to its successor. For I
perceived at last that I was grown head and shoulders
above my mother, who herself was a tall woman, and I
was not a little proud to feel that I was approaching
manhood.</p>

<p>I had pleaded hard after my father’s sudden death to
be allowed to remain at home and help my mother in
managing the farm, for I knew that she would need a
helping hand and head where there was so much to do.
There would, I foresaw, be many an occasion when she
would need someone to carry messages and ride forth on
business, and it seemed to me that I was the one to
undertake such affairs. And for a time my mother,
feeling the loneliness of her position, was minded to keep
me at home to help her. But having taken counsel, as
was her wont upon all important matters, with Parson
Drumbleforth, she considered it best that I should go
back to Dr. Parsons for a twelvemonth at least.</p>

<p>“Thou wilt do thy poor mother most good, Will,” said
Parson Drumbleforth, “by going back to thy book and
attending thereto. As to farm matters, she hath Jacob
Trusty to assist her, and a wiser man in husbandry I
know not. Go back, then, lad, to my good friend Doctor
Parsons, and mind thy book for the space of a year, and
get some strength into those great bones of thine against
the time when thou wilt be master of Dale’s Field.”</p>

<p>And with that I was fain to be content, and returned
to school, determined to do my duty there until such
times as I was called to do it elsewhere. Yet I cared
little about book-learning, for my head was always
running after what things were going on at Dale’s Field,
and I fear that my mind was often with Jacob Trusty
and Timothy Grass when it ought to have been immersed
in far diverse matters. It was, for example, a
hard thing to sit in the ancient schoolhouse on a fine
spring morning, staring at the grammar and remembering
that at that very moment Jacob Trusty was probably
counting the young lambs in the home meadow.
At such times I used to wish that I could jump across
the country and join Jacob for an hour, so inviting was
the thought of the green fields and bright sunshine.
However, I had a good deal of consolation in the weekly
home-going, for I ran off homewards as soon as school
was over on Friday, and did not return until Monday.
By my mother’s pleasure I was often accompanied on
these week-end visits by one or other of my fellows, Ben
Tuckett or Tom Thorpe, and on the Saturday we were
as often as not joined by Jack Drumbleforth, with whom
we had many a royal day at birds’-nesting, so that the
country round there became as familiar to us as the
lines on our hands. And once or twice at holiday times
I had all three lads to stay with me at Dale’s Field, and
our merrymaking was great.</p>

<p>So the time went on, and I was growing every month
and assuming vast proportions, so that people who knew
me not stared in astonishment on learning my age, and
thought me older than I was. For at my fifteenth year
I was nearly six feet high and well-fashioned into the
bargain, being broad-shouldered and properly proportioned,
and having nothing of the beanstalk about me,
as so many fast-growing lads have. Moreover, I was
developing considerable strength, and could lift and
carry a load of wheat or potatoes as easily as if it were a
pikestaff. But Jacob Trusty would not allow me to do
much in that way.</p>

<p>“Husband thy strength, William,” he was wont to say,
“husband thy strength. For what good will it do thee
to show folk how strong thou art now? ’Tis a fine sight,
doubtless, to see so young a lad possess the strength of
a grown man, but such things are, after all, but in the
way of sight-seeing, and afford only a passing curiosity.
Keep thy strength, lad, for thy manhood, for thou mayst
find a time of blows, and worse, coming.”</p>

<p>Now, when I was fifteen I told my mother with all
respect that I thought it time I was busied about the
farm and learning the active duties of life. And in this
view I was supported by Dr. Parsons, who drove over to
Dale’s Field one day during the holidays in order to talk
with my mother about me. I can see him now as he sat
in my mother’s parlour, a little round figure in sober
black, with a bald head and gold spectacles, over which
he would occasionally blink at me, as if wondering at my
great height and breadth.</p>

<p>“Mistress Dale,” said the doctor, “as for your great
lad here, I fear he must leave me. For look you, he is
a man already in size, a regular Anak, and towers head
and shoulders above his fellows.”</p>

<p>“As he does above me, sir,” said my mother with a smile.</p>

<p>“Yea, and above me, his master. Well, dame, but the
lad’s heart is always with ye here, and his head is always
running on sheep and cattle, turnip and wheat, sowing
and reaping. And so now, having made him into a fair
scholar, let him set to and make a better farmer.”</p>

<p>“I trust he has done his duty, sir?” said my mother.</p>

<p>“He hath been a good lad, mistress, a good lad indeed.
For if he hath been slow he hath made sure, which is
high praise. Yea, I am well enough pleased with thee,
Will, and wish thee well.”</p>

<p>And so I was fairly entered upon my life’s business,
which, as I understood it, was to do my duty to the land
which my fathers had left me and hand it forward to my
successors even better than when I found it. I need not
tell you that I entered into my new mode of life with
great eagerness. A proud lad I was when my mother
bought me a new horse whereon to ride about the farm,
and fitted me up in addition with a new saddle and
bridle. My old schoolmates envied me not a little when
they saw my new estate. They, too, were leaving school
and going into the world, but none of them were thrown
into such pleasant occupation as mine. I at least
thought so, and so I believe did they. For Jack
Drumbleforth was going to Oxford, so that he might
in time become a parson, and Tom Thorpe had been
articled to Mr. Hook the lawyer, and would henceforth
have to live amongst the parchment and ink, while
poor Ben Tuckett, meeting the worst fate of all, was
apprenticed to a grocer of Pontefract, and liked the
prospect ill.</p>

<p>“You are the one to be envied, Will,” said Jack
Drumbleforth, “for you will be able to breathe fresh air
every minute of the day if you are so minded, while I
am poring over old books and while Tom is hunting
ancient parchments and poor Ben is frying in the grocer’s
shop. However, lads, ’tis all in a life and will be all the
same a hundred years hence. I dare say we shall all
meet again sooner or later.”</p>

<p>But with Jack Drumbleforth we did not meet often
during the next few years, for he presently went away to
Oxford and was entered at one of the colleges, and only
came home to see his father once a year in the summer
time. But Tom Thorpe and Ben Tuckett used to come
to Dale’s Field often, for they were both apprenticed in
Pontefract, and it was a pleasant walk across the
meadows, so that they both took to coming every Sunday,
and we made them heartily welcome and looked for
them as a regular thing. And in the summer, when
Jack Drumbleforth was at home, we had some gay meetings,
for Jack was always full of life and suffered no one
to be dull in his presence. He would come and stay
all day in our harvest-field, eating and drinking with me
and the men, and making merry with all until the sun
set. And we always held our harvest-home supper
before the time came for Jack to go back to his college,
for he professed that he lived upon the remembrance of
it for all the succeeding winter.</p>

<p>So the years went on, quietly and uneventfully for us
at Dale’s Field. Time had somewhat healed our great
sorrow, though it could never wholly destroy it. My
mother had grown resigned, even happy again, and she
took great pride in her children. Lucy was growing a
fine girl by that time, and was a great help in the house,
for she seemed to possess my mother’s clever ways, and
was an adept at all domestic matters of preserving and
baking and cooking and so forth. She was growing up
not unlike my mother, that is to say, she was a tall,
well-made girl with pleasant features and kind eyes and
brown hair, which I believe Master Ben Tuckett learnt
to admire even in our school days. For Lucy was Ben’s
goddess, and he would fetch and carry for her like any
dog. Nay, it dawned upon me as time went on that
Ben had fallen in love with Lucy, such signs did he
sometimes show of it. And I minded not, for I loved
them both, and Ben was a good fellow. But I said
naught of it even to my mother, being minded to let
matters take their course.</p>

<p>In the year in which I came of age our harvest was
an uncommonly favourable one. We had warm and
nourishing rains in spring and abundant sunshine
afterwards, and the corn had sprung and shot and ripened
and was ready for the scythe by the end of July. And
for many a week after that we had favourable weather,
for day after day dawned bright and hot, and our men
were in the fields early and late, cutting the grain with
scythe and sickle, and binding and setting up the sheaves
in long rows across the stubble. We had not, I think, a
shower of rain during all that time of ingathering, and
we were pleased and thankful that we should have such
a favourable harvest. We were a little over a month in
reaping and housing our crops, and it was getting near
to my birthday in the second week of August, when our
last field was ready to be cleared. So it seemed good to
my mother that we should hold a merrymaking in
honour of my coming to man’s estate at the same time
as we held our harvest-home.</p>

<p>“For it will all be one trouble and one preparation,
Will,” she said, “and we shall have but one asking of our
guests. Yet we must have some extra merrymaking at
a time like this, when you are going to enter into man’s
estate and your own land at the same time.”</p>

<p>“Nay, mother,” said I, “what do I want more than to
serve you?”</p>

<p>For, indeed, I cared not about their legal formalities,
which would transfer the broad acres of Dale’s Field to
me from those who had held them in trust. So long as
they were ours and we were living upon them, I cared
for nothing more.</p>

<p>“Nay,” said she, “my son must enter into his father’s
possessions. Ah, Will, thou art so like thy father now.
I think I see him in thee, just as he was two-and-twenty
years ago. Well, but what shall we do at this feast,
Will?”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said I, “I am no hand at that sort of
thing, mother. Let us consult Jack Drumbleforth.
He will know what we should do and tell us how to
do it.”</p>

<p>And I went out and found Jack in our stackyard, where
he was talking with Jacob Trusty, and carried him into
the great kitchen, where my mother and Lucy were
making fruit pies, and there we explained to Jack what
it was we wished to do.</p>

<p>“Why,” said he, “what you want first of all, Mistress
Dale, is to fill your larder with provisions. I warrant
that everybody will be hungry and thirsty at a time like
that.”</p>

<p>“If that be all,” said my mother, “nobody shall have
cause to go away sorrowful.”</p>

<p>“Well, ’tis not all, but ’tis a great deal. What say you,
now, if you have a great feast in the big barn? Or,
come, ’tis fine weather, why not have it on the lawn
outside here, and a dance to follow? You will ask all your
friends, Will, and, indeed, make everybody who likes to
come welcome.”</p>

<p>“Anyone shall be welcome who comes that day,” said
my mother.</p>

<p>“We will have great things,” said Jack, rubbing his
hands. “See to it that there is plenty to eat and drink,
Mistress Dale, and I will do the rest. Come thou with
me, Will, and we will talk matters over with Jacob
Trusty.”</p>

<h2>X</h2>

<h3>OF MY COMING OF AGE</h3>

<p>During the next few days Jack Drumbleforth was in his
element. Naught pleased him so well as to be manager
of a feast or entertainment, and he found vast delight
in making plans how this or that should be done, and
in what order the guests should sit, and so with a
multitude of matters which would have caused me a
great deal of discomfort. I was well pleased to have
Jack close at hand at this time, for he took the weight
off my shoulders and left me free, which was what I
wanted.</p>

<p>The final arrangement come to between Jack and my
mother, with Lucy thrown in as counsellor, was that
we should have two entertainments, the first for the
labourers and their wives and children, the second for
our friends and acquaintance, and such of our own
quality as might drop in upon us. This we thought to
be better than entertaining all together, as it left us free
to pay more attention to our guests than if they had all
come upon one day. Again, said Jack, the men would
feel more at home amongst themselves, and would cut
their jokes and amuse themselves better than in the
presence of their masters. So we fixed the entertainment
for the labourers on the 24th of August, that
being my birthday, and for our other friends on the
25th. These things being settled, my mother and Lucy
set to work with a right good will, and very soon our
larder began to look as if we were threatened with a
siege. I was at that time always blessed with a good
appetite—indeed, I thank God, I always have been—and
it used to whet it to look through the latticed
window and see the good things which their nimble
fingers had shaped in honour of the coming feast. I
used to call Jack Drumbleforth and bid him peep
through the lattices too, at which Jack’s mouth would
water, for he, too, was endowed with a healthy appetite,
so that we were often forced to cut ourselves a great
slice of cold pie, and wash it down with a quart of ale
out of sympathy. Nor did we ever find that these slight
refreshments interfered with our meals, though I have
heard people say that to eat between breakfast and
dinner is to spoil the latter.</p>

<p>It was no slight trouble to invite the guests to our
entertainment, for my mother was anxious that all our
acquaintance should come, and as many of them were
hard to get at, I had no little riding about to do before
I had got them all invited. As for the labourers, we
decided that all who had ever done a day’s work for us
at odd times should come, with their wives and families,
and that all our present hands should have the privilege
of asking a friend. In this way there was a goodly
assemblage gathered together in our great barn when
the day came. The barn, thanks to Jack Drumbleforth,
had been very gaily decorated with boughs and flowers,
and looked quite inviting as one entered it from the
stackyard. My mother, indeed, said that she had never
seen a prettier sight than it presented when all the
company were met, and Parson Drumbleforth rose up
to say grace before meat.</p>

<p>And indeed a pleasant sight it was, and one that did
my heart good to see. For right down the centre of the
barn ran a long table, which the carpenter had fixed up
that morning, with benches on either side that would
seat each over fifty persons. The walls were gaily
spread with fresh-plucked boughs, and Lucy had ornamented
the table with bunches of flowers, so that there
was green, and red, and white, and blue everywhere.
But if the flowers on the table looked well, what shall
I say of all the goodly dishes that almost hid the snow-white
cloth from sight? My mother, like all good
housewives, loved hospitality, and nothing would satisfy
her but that she must put before her guests all that she
could devise or our larder command. I do not think
that the daintiest epicure could have found fault with
our table that night, for if the fare was homely, it was
well cooked and pleasantly served, which is no small
matter. As for the beef, it was of Jacob Trusty’s own
feeding, and so was the bacon, and our people seemed
to think that there was additional recommendation in
that. At any rate, they praised both by sending up
their plates time and again, and the carvers had a
merry time of it, and so had Jack Drumbleforth, whose
office it was to preside at the great barrel of ale that
had been placed in the coolest corner of the barn.
Everybody, indeed, was at his or her busiest attending
to the wants of our guests, and my mother’s face
beamed with satisfaction as she watched the men and
their wives and children enjoying their entertainment.</p>

<p>Though I had somewhat hung back from it, being
always loath to put myself forward, they had forced me,
saying it was the proper thing, to take the chair at the
head of the long table, and preside over this great feast.
So there I sat in my best, feeling as if every eye was
fixed upon me, and yet very proud withal of the honour,
and Jacob Trusty and Timothy Grass, being our oldest
men, sat one on either side of me, while Parson
Drumbleforth sat at the foot of the table as vice-chairman.
While the supper was being discussed, every
man was too busily engaged to think of aught else; but
when all had eaten their fill, and their minds had a
chance, certain of the older men began to look at Jacob
Trusty and cough in a significant manner, so that I
immediately grew very hot about the ears, knowing
right well that they wanted Jacob to propose my health,
which would oblige me to make a speech in reply. For
a time, however, Jacob Trusty did not choose to take
the hint. Perhaps he was already composing his speech
in his own mind, or waiting for an idea to come to him.
However, the silence and the expectant looks continuing,
Timothy Grass thought it well to call Jacob’s attention
to the matter.</p>

<p>“I think, Jacob,” said Timothy Grass, “I think the
folks expect a word or two from you, it being a great
occasion, and you the oldest man present. So up,
Jacob, and let us hear what hast got to say, man.”</p>

<p>I think that Jacob was secretly pleased with his
mission, and felt his own importance in the matter,
though, like other greater men, he pretended that he
rose with diffidence, and was unprepared to sustain so
difficult a part. Jack Drumbleforth, too, said that he
was minded to believe that Jacob had been committing
his little speech to memory, and practising it in spare
moments; but I paid no heed to Jack, knowing of old
that Jacob was a ready talker, and never fast for words.
However, I question whether Jacob ever had so large
an audience, or such an attentive one, as upon that
occasion, for every eye was turned upon him, and the
youngest stable-boy ran outside into the fold to drive
away the hens which were cackling and clucking without
the barn-door.</p>

<p>“Master William, and friends all,” said Jacob, when
he had fairly gotten upon his legs, and Parson
Drumbleforth had rapped loudly upon the table to command
attention—“Master William, and friends all, this is a great
occasion, and has been honoured accordingly. I thank
God that I have lived to see it, to see the lad grow into
a man. And such a man! Friends, I have seen three
generations of Dales, and they have all been big men;
but this is bigger all ways, length and breadth, wherefore,
I say, I am glad, because the old stock is as fine as ever.
Now, there’s some among you who can remember Master
William being born, and how he grew up to a lad, and
you’ve seen him change from a lad to a man. All that
I’ve seen too, perhaps a bit closer than most of you,
because he’s been mine from the very first, and he’ll not
deny it. Who showed him his first bird’s-nest but Jacob
Trusty? Who made him his first whip, or gave him his
first ride a-horseback, but me? I ha’ done a deal for
him, child and boy, and I feel a sort o’ right in him.
Well, friends all, Master William has come to manhood
at last, and here he sits amongst us, master of the good
old acres on which you and me have toiled. Here he
sits for all to look at and admire—a fine, big man, like
his fathers, six foot four in his stockings, and strong as
a bull. And so, friends, having seen him grow up to
manhood, I have seen all I wished for, and can die
happy. ’Tis but a poor way of saying it, but Master
William knows how old Jacob loves him and the old
place. So now, friends, young and old, fill your glasses.
Fill ’em up, and drink ’em off to the health and long life
of William Dale.”</p>

<p>I can see him now as he stood there, tall, erect,
silver-haired, in his clean smock and gay neckerchief,
his oldweather-beaten, wrinkled face shining with good
humour, and a tear in his bright blue eye as he lifted
his glass to drink my health. I can feel the clasp of his
hard, horny hand as he grasped mine and said, “God bless
thee, William, lad, God bless thee!” No heartier or truer
hand-clasp ever met mine than that, for no man ever
loved me more than Jacob Trusty.</p>

<p>There was quite a storm of shouting and cheering
when Jacob had done, and I was outfaced with the
warmth of the reception given to me. Then came Jack
Drumbleforth to the back of my chair, whispering me to
rise and speak while the iron was hot, and then I found
myself on my legs, staring at the eager faces before me,
and wondering what I was going to say. As to what I
did say I cannot tell, though I can remember everything
that old Jacob said. But I spoke from my heart, and
thanked them for their kindly feeling to me and mine,
and promised to be a good master to all who worked,
and should work for me, and swore that no man who
ever tilled my land should want food or shelter if any
evil day fell upon him and his, which vow I have
faithfully kept to this present. And after that there were
more healths drunk, and Parson Drumbleforth made us
a serious speech, after which his son Jack made us a
merry one, whereat everybody laughed heartily. And
then the whole company adjourned into the orchard,
where the elder people sat about under the trees, and
the children played at various sports, devised by Ben
Tuckett and my sister Lucy, and everything went as
merry as a marriage bell. As for Jack Drumbleforth, he
was here, there, and everywhere, superintending this,
and arranging that, while his father and my mother and
I walked about from group to group, saying a word to
everyone, and bidding all hearty welcome to Dale’s
Field. When all were tired of further merrymaking
there was more ale and refreshment served out, and
then I stood at the orchard gate and shook hands with
all as they went homeward, receiving their blessings as
they passed away.</p>

<p>“Odd’s fish!” said Jack Drumbleforth, when the last
was gone; “I am as dry as if I had sat before a lime-kiln
this five hours. It is hard work this merrymaking, after
all, Will. However, what matters a dry throat and tired
legs, if other folk are pleased? Thy guests—I think
they all enjoyed their entertainment, Will?”</p>

<p>“That indeed they did, Jack, thanks to you.”</p>

<p>“Nay, man, no thanks to me. But I am so hungry
that I must inside and persuade Lucy to give me a cut
of game pie and a pint of ale. ’Tis supper-time already.
Come in, Will, and join me.”</p>

<p>But I was in no humour for it just then. My head
was all in a whirl with the events of the evening, and I
was anxious to take a quiet walk round my meadows in
the moonlight to get the heat and noise out of my brain.
Already through the lighted window I could see my
mother and Lucy and Ben Tuckett and Parson Drumbleforth
gathering round the supper-table, well pleased with
the day’s proceedings. I bade Jack go in and join them.</p>

<p>“I am going for a walk round the meadow, Jack,” I
said. “Tell them I will come in presently when my
head cools. The noise rings in it yet.”</p>

<p>So I went away through the orchard into the home
meadows and wandered, thinking of many things, across
the dewy grass in the direction of the woods. The
harvest-moon was at its full, and the air was soft and
warm. From the road beyond Dale’s Field came the
sound of a post-chaise driven rapidly onward by the
hurrying post-boy. The sound of the wheels died away
as I walked across the shining grass; and then the
silence was complete. I lifted my hat and let the cool
air sweep over my forehead. I thought of what good
old Jacob had said, and of the hearty expressions of
good-will which had come to me on every side. These
thoughts were serious and weighty, and made me think
much of my new responsibilities. For I was now Dale
of Dale’s Field, and the broad acres around me were
mine.</p>

<p>I was in no hurry to turn homewards, and half
unconsciously I passed into the wood and went down
the path that led to the mill by the river-side. The
wheel was turning slowly and the spray darted like silver
in the moonlight. I stood in the lane and watched it
for awhile, and then I turned down towards Wentbridge,
thinking to reach home by the road. I remembered that
I must say good-night to Parson Drumbleforth and Jack
before they drove homewards, and I hurried my steps,
chiding myself that my thoughts had carried me so far
afield. But as I reached the foot of the lane and was
turning up the hill I came upon two figures in the
moonlight, at sight of whom I stopped. A man, on
horseback, evidently booted and spurred for a journey,
sat bending down to speak to a female whose hand lay
on his horse’s bridle. At sound of my foot the man
looked up. I could not see his face, but the moon shone
full on my own. He raised his hand.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said he, “an that is not Will Dale, I am dreaming!
Will, is it not you? It is years since we met, lad,
and ’twas a sad time; but, why, it is I, Philip Lisle,
Will, and here is Rose—thou wilt remember Rose,
though she is no longer a little maiden, but grown almost
a woman.”</p>

<h2>XI</h2>

<h3>OF MY SECOND MEETING WITH ROSE LISLE</h3>

<p>Now, it seemed to me when I heard Philip Lisle’s voice,
that I was walking in a dream from which I should
presently wake to find myself elsewhere, so strange was
it to meet with him and Rose standing almost where I
had left them so many years before. Yet the strange
thrill of pleasure which shot through my heart was no
dream, and the clasp of Black Phil’s hand was warm and
real as he bent from his saddle to greet me.</p>

<p>“Ha!” said he, “I am glad to meet thee, Will Dale.
Rose, give Will thy hand. How many years is it, I
wonder, since thou and he rode together down yonder
bank on horse Cæsar’s back? Ye have both grown
somewhat since then, and I have grown older and grayer.”</p>

<p>Rose stretched out her hand to me and looked curiously
at me in the moonlight. She must indeed have wondered
to find the lad she remembered grown into such a strapping
man as I was then. Yet she could not be more
surprised than I was when I came to look at her in the
full light of the moon. She had grown into a tall and
stately maiden of gracious presence and rare beauty, in
which I could still trace some resemblance to the child
that had bent over me in the wood when I fell down
from the storm-cock’s nest. Now, I had never until then
looked much upon maidens, always having my mind
intent on other matters, but I felt that having once seen
Rose Lisle I could go on watching her dark eyes for ever.
So we stood looking at each other in the moonlight, each
no doubt wondering by what magic means time had so
soon wrought this great change in us.</p>

<p>“Well,” said Philip Lisle, “and how goes the world
with you, Will? I have never ridden this way since that
sad night many a year ago, and I dare say ye have all
well-nigh forgotten me.”</p>

<p>“That, indeed, we have not, sir. We have thought
often of you and of Mistress Rose here, and wondered
why you brought her not to see us as you promised.”</p>

<p>“Ah, lad, I have had much to do. My time has been
spent far north, Carlisle way, this ten years. For dost
know, Will, I had given up my old trade when I found
thee kneeling by thy poor father’s body that night. I
have been a King’s man since then; nay, I was even
then upon the King’s business. Rose and I have had a
quiet billet in Carlisle this many years.”</p>

<p>I was glad to hear that, and said so.</p>

<p>“But who knows, lad, how much longer it may be
quiet? There is trouble afoot. You have heard of it,
Will?”</p>

<p>“We have heard such news as travellers bring,” I answered.</p>

<p>“There is war at hand, Will,” said he. “War and no
less. You have heard that the King and Commons are
at daggers drawn. I fear it will be a great struggle, of
which no man can yet see the end.”</p>

<p>Now, in our parts we knew very little of the discussion
between the King and the Parliament, for news travelled
slowly, and we had enough to do to look after our own
concerns without troubling about those of our betters.
Nevertheless, so unsettled had been the times during the
past ten years that people had talked more than usual
about the doings of those in high places, and we were
thus somewhat familiar with certain great events which
had lately happened. We had heard, for example, of the
levying of ship-money on the port towns which had
caused so much ill-feeling throughout the country, and
travellers had told us of the resistance offered to it by
Mr. John Hampden and others. We had heard, too, of
the harsh punishment meted out to Prynne, the lawyer,
and to his companions Burton and Bastwick, whose path
from the prison to the pillory in Palace Yard the populace
had strewn with flowers. Then had come to us
news of the disturbances in Scotland, where the King
was fighting against numerous malcontents. Nothing
but trouble and sorrow, indeed, seemed to follow the
King at that time, and every traveller brought bad news
of great affairs. The Earl of Strafford had been executed.
The House of Commons had passed its Grand Remonstrance
against the King, who, in his turn, had impeached
five of its members of high treason, and attempted to
seize them in the House itself. Things, indeed, were in
a sad state, and yet because we were a long way from
London it seemed to us that we were out of danger and
need do nothing but attend to our own matters and thank
God that we had been born to quiet lives.</p>

<p>“Think you we shall hear aught of it in these parts?”
I asked, thinking these matters over as I stood by Philip
Lisle’s horse.</p>

<p>“Nay, lad, I cannot say. But, hark ye, Will, I am on
my way to Nottingham, where is to be a meeting of the
King’s friends this week, and I shall hear news there.
And so little faith have I of returning to Carlisle yet
awhile that I have brought Rose southwards with me.
We came here but an hour ago, and Rose is going to stay
with the old woman at the inn yonder for a couple of days
until I return with more certain news.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said I, “why should Mistress Rose stay at the
inn when Dale’s Field is so near? Mistress Rose, persuade
your father to bring you up to Dale’s Field. Come,
sir, if you are in no great need to ride on, go up and
sup with me. My mother and sister will be glad to see
you once more, and they will welcome your daughter
heartily.”</p>

<p>“Thou speakest kindly, Will,” said Philip Lisle. “What
do you say, Rose? Wouldst rather stay with Mistress
Dale than at the inn yonder?”</p>

<p>“I would rather stay with Mistress Dale,” said Rose.</p>

<p>“Then we will go up with thee, Will. Indeed, man, I
should have come to see thee but for fear of waking sad
memories. It was but a sad time when I saw thy poor
mother last. But now, here is Rose’s horse at the inn
stable. What shall we do with him?”</p>

<p>“I will send a man for him, sir,” said I. “Make yourself
easy about that.”</p>

<p>So we went up the hill and turned in at the orchard
gate of Dale’s Field and went into the house. Parson
Drumbleforth and Jack had gone homeward, but Ben
Tuckett had gotten himself a few days’ holiday and was
to stay with us over the festivities, and we now found
him making himself agreeable to my mother and Lucy.
I led Philip and Rose into my mother’s parlour and
fetched her in to them from the great kitchen, whispering
to her who our visitors were and what I wanted. And
she, receiving them with hearty hospitality, would not be
content until they sat down and ate and drank, and she
sent Lucy off to prepare a chamber for Rose, and herself
pressed Philip Lisle to remain overnight with us and
continue his journey next day. But to that he could not
consent.</p>

<p>“Indeed,” said he, “I ought to be an hour on my
journey now, and should have been, only I must needs
linger on the bridge saying farewell to this maid of mine
until Will yonder comes up and presses me to enjoy your
hospitality, Mistress Dale. And glad enough I am, I
assure you, to leave my Rose in such good hands for a
day or two, for ’tis but poor work for young maidens to
stay at a wayside inn, though well enough for old
campaigners like myself.”</p>

<p>“We shall take good care of her here, sir,” said my
mother, stroking Rose’s hand with her own as she sat by
her. “Please God you will bring us back good news, for
we need better than we have had lately.”</p>

<p>But on that point Philip Lisle could say nothing
certain. Presently he rose and bid my mother and Lucy
farewell, and kissed Rose, and I went out with him and
walked by his horse’s side to the gate, where he stayed a
moment to speak to me.</p>

<p>“I may return this way, Will,” said he, “to-morrow
night, or next day. When I come I shall have news.
Say naught to anyone, lad, but I fear that there are
great things at hand.”</p>

<p>“You fear war?”</p>

<p>“Ay, and such war as is worse than war ’twixt two
nations. It will be war of brother upon brother, which
is a bad and sorry matter. However, let us do our best.
Fare thee well, good Will, till I come again.”</p>

<p>And with that he shook Cæsar’s bridle and rode away
into the moonlight, and I stood there until the sound of
the horse’s hoofs died away, and then went indoors to
find Lucy and Ben Tuckett telling Rose about our doings
that day, and of the grand entertainment we were to
have on the morrow.</p>

<p>Now to see Rose Lisle sitting there in my own house
by my mother’s side was to me the greatest delight I had
ever known. For it seemed somehow as if Rose and I
were old and familiar friends, though, indeed, we had
only met once in all our lives, and that many years
before, when we were but boy and girl. I could not
choose but look at her as she sat there talking to my
mother, and I wondered if there were any other maidens
in the world who were half so fair as she. I had never
forgotten how she looked that afternoon when I tumbled
out of the elm-tree, having kept the memory of her fresh
in my heart. Then she was a little dark-eyed, gipsy-looking
maiden, with a merry laugh and an arch way of
looking at you. Now she had become tall and stately
and graver of face, but she was more beautiful, and
when she smiled I saw the old arch look in her dark
eyes. Very often she glanced at me as I sat watching
her, and it seemed to me that a man could have no
greater happiness than to have such eyes for his light all
through life.</p>

<p>Now, Ben Tuckett was nothing if not soft-hearted,
and when my mother and Lucy had taken Rose to
her chamber, what must he do but pull his chair up
to mine and begin to pour out his sorrows into my
ear.</p>

<p>“Will,” said he, “I know you are in love with Mistress
Rose yonder, for no one who is not blind could fail to
see it.”</p>

<p>“You can see more than I can, then, Master Ben,” I
answered. “Why, man, I have never seen her since she
was a child until this night.”</p>

<p>“No matter,” said he. “Time is nothing to a lover.
You see your sweetheart, and it is all over in an instant.
Why, Will, your eyes were upon her every minute of the
time!”</p>

<p>I made an impatient movement, not being inclined for
this sort of conversation.</p>

<p>“However,” continued Ben, “I am not going to talk of
that, having other matters which are perhaps more
interesting to me. Will, dear lad, hast ever noticed how
it is with me?”</p>

<p>I knew quite well what he was aiming at, but I was
willing to jest with him a little.</p>

<p>“Nay,” I said, “what is it, Ben? You are certainly
not so fat as you were, but ’tis the hot weather that has
pulled you down.”</p>

<p>“You will jest, Will. But there are other matters
than hot weather that pull a man down. Though as to
being fat, I am not sorry to see myself going thinner.
I had rather be a bean-stalk than a butter-tub. But
seriously, Will, have you any objection to me for a
brother-in-law?”</p>

<p>“Nay, lad,” said I, “not a whit. I love thee, old Ben,
just as I love Jack and Tom, which is to say, as if ye all
three were brothers of mine already.”</p>

<p>He shook my hand heartily at that, and said he was
sure of it.</p>

<p>“You see, Will,” he continued, “I am now out of my
apprenticeship, and my old master, having had enow of
trade, is minded to give up his business to me, so that I
shall be my own master in future and doing for myself.
And so, lad, having loved Lucy this many a year, I shall
now ask her to marry me.”</p>

<p>“I wish you success, Ben,” I said. “You will get a
good wife.”</p>

<p>“No better,” said he, “in all the world. Oh, Will, ’tis
a rare thing to be a lover! The world seems a new place
to a man in love, even if he be such a humdrum individual
as I. Well, ye will not be long out of love yourself, Will.
Mistress Rose’s dark eyes will be too powerful
for you.”</p>

<p>But I dare not think of aught of that sort yet, for
Rose seemed to me like a young goddess whom all might
admire and reverence, but none claim for his own. Yet
I thought much of her that night, for the excitement of
the day had made me restless, so that I could not sleep,
which was a rare thing with me. However, I paid for it
next morning, sleeping two hours over my usual time,
and waking to find that it was already seven o’clock, and
the sun high in the heavens. When I went downstairs
I found that Lucy and Ben Tuckett had gone into the
barn to make some arrangements for the evening’s
festivities, and that my mother and Rose were in the
garden, which my mother was very fond of showing to
her visitors. There I joined them, and found Rose
more attractive than ever in the fresh morning light.
Presently my mother went indoors to hurry on the
breakfast preparations, and Rose and I were left together.
And of what we talked I know not, save that
it was about ourselves, and that I could have stayed
there for ever, listening to her voice, and watching the
smiles come and go on her sweet face. And then I
suddenly remembered the primrose she had given me
years before, and led her to the corner of the garden
where I had buried it in my lead box.</p>

<p>“Do you remember, Mistress Rose,” I said, “the primrose
you pinned in my coat that afternoon, and the
guinea your father gave me when he carried you away?
Let us see if they are still where I put them.”</p>

<p>I got a spade, and began to turn up the soil, which
had never been disturbed since the day I buried the lead
box there. Presently I turned it up to the light, and
placed it in her hands, and bade her open it, while I
looked over her shoulder, to see how the treasures had
fared.</p>

<p>“Oh!” she cried; “see, the primrose is still unfaded,
and here is the guinea. And you have kept them all
these years! But was it not a strange place to keep
them, where you could never see them?”</p>

<p>“Why,” I said, “it was the only place I could call my
own. Let me put them back, and do you put another
flower in the lead box, and we will dig them up again at
some future time, and see how they fare.”</p>

<p>“What shall I put in?” she said. “There are nothing
but roses now, I think. This red rose?” and she put it
with the primrose, and shut the box, and gave it back to
me with a merry laugh, and watched me carefully bury
it again. Then, as we were going back to the house,
she said:</p>

<p>“I, too, kept some of the primroses gathered that
afternoon, and they are pressed between the leaves
of an old book at home. Some day, perhaps, I shall
show them to you.”</p>

<p>That made me very happy, for I saw that Rose had
not forgotten the day when she first met me in the woods
above the old mill, but had thought sometimes of it and
of me.</p>

<h2>XII</h2>

<h3>OF THE FIRST TIDINGS OF WAR</h3>

<p>That day was an eventful one to us at Dale’s Field in
more than one way. As soon as breakfast was over we
had to commence our preparations for the evening’s
festivities, which were to be on a larger scale than those
of the previous day. Everybody was busily engaged,
and there seemed some difficulty as to what should be
done with Rose, until she offered to help my mother.</p>

<p>“For I know something about these matters, Mrs. Dale,”
said she, “and will help you if I may, and you
will command me. I dare say you will find me of some
use where all are so busy.”</p>

<p>And therewith my mother furnished her with a large
apron and set her to dust the best china, which was a
great honour, as I presently told her, no one but my
mother ever daring so much as to touch those priceless
cups and platters.</p>

<p>“Then, indeed, I am highly honoured,” she said, while
I stood there and watched her graceful fingers move
about the things. “But you, Master William, is there
nothing that you can do? For you seem to be the only
one who is doing nothing.”</p>

<p>Now, I ought to have been riding round the fields at
that moment, but I felt compelled to stay where I was—why,
I know not.</p>

<p>“There is nothing that I can do,” I said. “I am so
awkward and clumsy that they trust nothing to me. If
you like, I will help you to wipe these dishes, Mistress
Rose.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” she said, “if you are so awkward as all that, I
fear the poor dishes would come to the ground. But
why do you not help your sister and Master Tuckett to
decorate the barn? I saw them go across the fold a few
minutes ago with a basket of flowers.”</p>

<p>“They will be as well pleased at my absence as with
my company,” I said, “or better.”</p>

<p>“And why?”</p>

<p>“Because two’s company and three’s none, and Ben
and Lucy are very fond of each other’s company.”</p>

<p>“But surely there must be something you can be
doing,” she said. A man should never be idle.”</p>

<p>“I am well enough here watching you,” I answered.</p>

<p>“If you watch me, I shall be sure to let the china fall,
and then your mother will be sorry she entrusted it to
my hands. Now, see, there is a young gentleman riding
into the yard; you must go out and see him.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said I, glancing out of the window, “ ’tis only
Jack Drumbleforth, our parson’s son. He will find his
way in here readily enough without my meeting him.”</p>

<p>And presently, indeed, we saw Jack striding across the
fold in the direction of the kitchen-door, which he threw
open a minute later with a cheery salutation. I can yet
see his start of surprise and the astonished look on his
face when he found me leaning against the wall talking
to a beautiful young lady whom he had never seen before.</p>

<p>“Come in, Jack,” said I. “Let me present thee to an
old friend of mine, Mistress Rose Lisle. Mistress Rose,
this gentleman is my old schoolmate, Master John
Drumbleforth.”</p>

<p>Then I stood smiling upon them while Jack made his
best bow and Rose curtsied to him in the finest fashion.</p>

<p>“Mistress Rose,” said Jack, still astonished of face,
“I am your most humble servant. What Will here says
of me is indeed true, for we were lads together. But he
did never tell me of his old friend, Mistress Rose Lisle.”</p>

<p>“Master Dale is jesting with you, sir,” said Rose. “He
hath nothing better to do this fine morning, when we are
all so busy.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said I, “ ’tis true enough. Did I never tell thee,
Jack, of how I fell from the elm in Went Vale yonder
and was ministered to by an angel?”</p>

<p>“But that is many years ago,” said Rose, “and the
angel was a little girl in a red hood.”</p>

<p>“But, nevertheless, it was Mistress Rose Lisle. So
that I was right in saying ‘an old friend,’ eh, Jack?”</p>

<p>“I am not sorry thou didst fall out of the elm-tree,
Will,” said Jack, “if it made Mistress Rose friend of
thine. I have had many a tumble myself, but I never
fell in Fortune’s way. However, there may be a chance
Will, what dost say if I go to the wars?”</p>

<p>“To the wars? Man, thou art to be a parson.”</p>

<p>“Time enough for that when we have done with fighting.
For fighting there will be erelong, so sure as my
name is Jack Drumbleforth.”</p>

<p>“Have you heard some fresh news, sir?” asked Rose.</p>

<p>“Nay, mistress, nothing very fresh, save that it is said
the King and Commons have come to an open breach at
last, and that blood will certainly be shed. Hah!” said
Jack, taking down and looking lovingly at my ancient
broadsword, “I am afraid there is more of the
swashbuckler about me than the parson. I did ever love a
fight, Will, as you know. Well, there will be heads
broken.”</p>

<p>“But which side wilt thou fight for, Jack?”</p>

<p>But at that he shook his head. It was a question
which puzzled many men at that time.</p>

<p>“Nay, lad, that I cannot answer yet awhile. I am for
the monarchy, of course, for there is warrant for that.
Yet I would hear something of the other side of the
question before I take sword in hand. Mark thee, Will,
there will be many a man in England take sides in this
quarrel who knows nothing of what he is fighting for.
It will be enough for such that they fight.”</p>

<p>Which saying was true enough as events proved. But
we had no time to discuss it then, for my mother entered
the kitchen, and bade us both begone for idlers, at
which Rose laughed, and we perforce departed into the
fold.</p>

<p>“Zounds, Will!” said Jack, when we were clear of the
house, “it is not like thee to have kept the fame of
Mistress Rose Lisle to thyself. Ah! thou hast a keen
eye for beauty, my old friend Will. Well, I wish thee
good luck. I will dance at thy wedding, an I be not
killed first.”</p>

<p>“Why, man,” said I, “have I not told thee I never saw
Mistress Rose yonder but once, when she was a little
maid that high, and I a great boy with a thick head?
It is soon to talk of weddings.”</p>

<p>“May be,” said he, “but if thou art not falling in love
with her, call me a Dutchman. I know the signs, Will.
What! I was in love myself at Oxford with Gillian, the
pastrycook’s daughter. Poor Gillian—the lightest foot,
I think, that ever trod a measure, and could make you
the sweetest tarts I ever set tooth in! Well, I am like
to be happy with ye here at Dale’s Field, for there are
Ben and Lucy looking unutterable things at each other
in the barn, and thou wilt be sighing like a furnace
ere-long. As for me, I shall never marry, Will. An I
survive the wars I will take orders and live in some sweet
spot where I can compose madrigals and sonnets to
Phyllis. I flatter me that I have as pretty a taste in
that line as man need have.”</p>

<p>“Thou seemest resolved that there shall be some fighting,
Jack.”</p>

<p>“Why, yes. For, dost thou not see, the land is now
in such a state that heads must be broken ere ever
things will heal? ’Tis a sad business, but war there
must be.”</p>

<p>Then we went to our respective duties, Jack to
superintend certain arrangements which he had taken upon
himself, and I to ride round the farm on my horse, in
which usual task I spent two hours, so that the morning
was far advanced when I returned to the house. Ben
and Lucy were still busied in the barn, in which we
were to dance that evening, and very fine they had made
it look when I put my head in at the door to peep at
them. The walls were ornamented with green stuff;
there were seats all round for the old folks, and such as
did not dance; and there was a raised platform at one
end for the fiddler to sit on. Calling my approval to
Ben and Lucy, I went round the buildings to the garden,
where I expected to find Jack. There, indeed, I did find
him, leaning against the wall, with his coat off and his
hat pushed back from his forehead, his kerchief in one
hand, and a tankard of ale in the other. And there in
front of him, laughing at some joke of his, stood Rose,
bearing a trencher, on which was a jug from which she
had just filled Jack’s tankard. When she saw me she
set down the trencher, and ran away to the kitchen,
returning presently with another tankard, which she
filled and offered to me as I came up to them.</p>

<p>“Mistress Rose,” I said, “I know not why it is, but
surely our ale never tasted half so fine as this.”</p>

<p>“Well said, Will,” said Jack. “That, indeed, is just
what I thought. For mark you, I have been toiling so
hard that my mouth was as dry as a bone, and I could
not forbear imploring Mistress Rose to bring me a
tankard of ale. And indeed ’tis nectar, and Mistress
Rose is Hebe, and we are gods.”</p>

<p>But Rose laughed and ran away, and Jack and I were
left alone.</p>

<p>“Jack, Jack!” I said. “I fear me thou hast a soft
heart. What, dost not know the way to our cellar
thyself long before this?”</p>

<p>“There is a deal in service, lad. I cannot away with
your ugly waiter who sets down your pot with a scowl
on his ill-favoured countenance. But a Hebe with eyes
like violets, and a shape like Spring—why, the liquor
seems to leap divine in the pewter. ’Tis a beautiful
maiden, though, Will, and a good, and will make thee
such a wife as a man should pray for. Ah me! it must
be a fine thing to be wedded to a good woman.”</p>

<p>“Thou speakest as if thou wert married to some old
shrew,” said I.</p>

<p>“Why, in one sense, Will, I am, for I am married to
myself, and what worse partner can a man have? I am
neither fish, flesh, nor good red herring. However, I
may be good enough to go to the wars and handle a
pike.”</p>

<p>So the day wore on, and at last all my preparations
were made, and it was time for our guests to arrive.
We were all arrayed in our finest clothes, and looked, I
think, very grand, especially Ben Tuckett, who had
brought with him a new lace coat which was very fine
indeed, and much admired by everybody. There had
been much consultation during the day between Lucy
and Rose, for the latter had brought but a simple gown
and riding-habit with her upon her travels, and she was
puzzled how to honour my coming of age in a fitting
manner. However, she and Lucy were much of a size,
and at last Rose appeared in a white gown that Lucy
had lent her, and looked so beautiful in it that Jack and
Ben and myself were struck dumb with admiration, and
swore amongst ourselves that we had never seen so fair
a maiden, though Ben immediately afterwards recanted,
and said that he must on consideration give the palm to
Lucy.</p>

<p>My mother had insisted on asking all our friends and
acquaintance to honour us with their presence, and by
six o’clock in the evening there was quite a large
assemblage on our lawn, and our stables were full of horses
ridden by their owners from a distance. When we were
all assembled, we adjourned to the great kitchen, where
we were able to accommodate nearly one hundred guests,
and there we all sat down to supper, I again sitting at
the head of the table, with Parson Drumbleforth on my
right, and Lawyer Hook on my left. And after dinner
there were speeches made, and my health was drunk,
and I was loudly congratulated. But I thought somehow
that Jack had the best time of it after all, for he
sat next to Rose, and talked to her constantly. However,
as I found out afterwards, the honest fellow was
sounding my praises in her ears all the time, which was
just like him. After supper was well over, we walked
about on the lawn and in the orchard for a time, while
Jack Drumbleforth and Ben Tuckett saw to the lighting
of the lamps and candles in the barn. This done, we
all went thither, and the fiddler, being supplied with a
jug of ale, was bidden to ply his elbow merrily for a
country dance. Then arose within me considerable
wonder as to which of my guests I should ask to dance
with me. This question Lucy settled to my satisfaction
by saying that as Rose was the greatest stranger I should
lead off the dance with her. So then I had the great
happiness of leading Rose out into the middle of the
floor, and Ben Tuckett led out Lucy, and the others
followed in due course, and the fiddler scraped away
with his bow, and we all felt as happy as children. But
just as we were beginning the first steps, and Rose was
laughingly showing me what to do next, for I was no
great hand at it, I heard the sound of a horse’s feet on
the stones in the yard. And then I saw Philip Lisle
coming in behind the people, dusty, travel-stained, and
tired. Rose and I made for him through the throng.
The people gave over dancing, and the fiddler stopped
with his bow in mid-air.</p>

<p>“What news?” I cried, for I saw that he had news.
The people crowded round him to hear his answer. He
stayed on the threshold, and raised his hat.</p>

<p>“God save the King!” he cried. “His Majesty raised
his flag at Nottingham against his enemies the day before
yesterday. God save the King!”</p>

<p>Now, there were some that echoed Philip Lisle’s cry
heartily. But there were others who said nothing and
looked very grave, while Parson Drumbleforth shook his
head sadly, saying that the kingdom which is divided
against itself shall not stand. And thus the red shadow
of war suddenly loomed over all our merrymaking.</p>

<h2>XIII</h2>

<h3>OF PHILIP LISLE’S CALL TO ARMS</h3>

<p>I THINK there was little more dancing amongst us upon
that evening, for no one seemed to have much heart left
for merrymaking after hearing Philip Lisle’s news.
Certainly the country had not been so peaceful during
the past few years as to make us feel that we were
suddenly thrown out of a state of security into a
condition of danger. No man, I suppose, had thought that
the difference ’twixt King and Commons could have other
ending than this. For so many years had the struggle
gone on and always with so much increase of bitterness
on either side that nothing but the shedding of blood
could bring peace to us again. And yet civil war is a
terrible and a fearful thing, for it is, as I think, a
setting of brother against brother and father against son.
Now, I think naught of one nation going to war with another,
for that seems natural and is only to be looked for, seeing
that human nature is what it is. Indeed, to fight with
Frenchmen or Spaniards seems to be one of the chief
duties of a true Englishman who loves his country. But
for Englishmen to fight with Englishmen, that, indeed,
is vastly out of place and ought never to be.</p>

<p>The assembly broke up into knots and fell to discussing
the situation. Parson Drumbleforth, whose face had
grown very anxious when he heard the news, drew near
to Philip Lisle and began to question him. A group of
others stood round us, hearkening to what was said.</p>

<p>“The King, you say, sir, hath raised his standard at
Nottingham?” said Parson Drumbleforth.</p>

<p>“He hath, your reverence. On the 22nd of August he
raised it, and is now gathering round him all that are
loyal to his Majesty.”</p>

<p>“Hath the King much following, sir?”</p>

<p>“He hath the majority of the Lords, sir, and as for the
Commons, there are large numbers of the members of
that House who will serve his Majesty.”</p>

<p>“But the country, sir,” said Parson Drumbleforth, “how
will the country go?”</p>

<p>“If the people do their duty, sir, will they not serve
their King, to whom they owe allegiance?”</p>

<p>Parson Drumbleforth shook his head at that and said
that these were sad days.</p>

<p>“For mark you, Master Lisle,” continued he, “I am a
Royalist to my last breath and to the last throb of my
heart, for so I am commanded by my conscience and my
reason. And yet I do think that in this matter his
Majesty hath not been well advised and will ultimately
suffer. I agree not with them who clamour for the right
of the people. I had rather be ruled by a tyrant than
by Demos, for your tyrant is but one man, but Demos is
a beast of many heads and dispositions. Nevertheless, it
had been well, I think, to humour the popular mind
somewhat in this case. For I fear me, Master Lisle, that
if it come to a case of endurance ’twixt the throne and the
people, the throne will come badly out of it.”</p>

<p>But Philip Lisle shook his head at that, and seemed to
regard Parson Drumbleforth as a faint-hearted Royalist
at the best.</p>

<p>“We have taken to the sword,” said Philip Lisle, “and
by the sword we shall put down this bad feeling towards
the monarchy. What, are those who are ruled to say
how they shall be ruled? It used to be said that power
came from God, but according to these new teachers it
cometh from the people.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said Parson Drumbleforth, “there are many
false teachers abroad, certainly. But, oh, sirs, it is a
terrible matter, this civil war, and I would that we could
see the end of it. For mind you, Master Lisle, these
disaffected men will fight, ay, to the death. I hear they
are smarting grievously under a sense of wrong, and such
men will give and take many a hard blow ere the affair
be settled.”</p>

<p>“The King hath his army,” said Philip Lisle.</p>

<p>“If the King hath the people against him, his army
will stand him in little stead, sir,” said an old gentleman,
Master Geoffrey Oldthwaite, who had listened attentively
to the conversation between Philip Lisle and the Vicar.
“Whether his Majesty know it or not, or whether or not
they that advise him know it, there is a strong feeling
against the King all through the land. For mark you,
sir—I speak freely—we Englishmen, as you should
know, being one yourself, do like that our liberties should
be preserved and honoured, we being a free people and of
a proud nature. Now, there are many who do not consider
that the King hath conserved the liberties of the
people. See what vexatious matters have come upon us
in this reign. Hath his Majesty ever been at one with
the members whom we send to represent us in Parliament?
Have there not been disputes concerning tonnage
and poundage, ship-money, and impropriations? We
have also heard, sir, of the Star Chamber and of the
sentences upon Masters Prynne and Bastwick, and now
the King hath endeavoured to seize five representatives
of the people sitting in their House. These matters, sir,
do not find acceptance with Englishmen. I speak freely,
being an Englishman.”</p>

<p>“It is true,” sighed Parson Drumbleforth; “it is true
there have been grievances. Whenever was it not so?
As for me, though I am a Royalist, I can never forget
that Saul was anything but a blessing to his people.
What we want, sirs, is mutual long-suffering. If the
King hath his rights, so have the people theirs. If he
hath his duties, so have they their duties.”</p>

<p>“His Majesty,” said Philip Lisle, “desires not to punish
any that are well disposed, but only them that are
traitorous. If any man have grievance against the State,
let him make his grievance known.”</p>

<p>“What, to the Star Chamber?’ said someone in the
rear of the group. “Would he find justice there, think
you?”</p>

<p>“At any rate,” cried Philip, “ ’tis poor work to fight
against your lawful sovereign. Sir, you are a clerk and
a learned man; tell us, now, is there Scriptural warrant
for this rising against his Majesty? I am no saint nor
much of a scholar, but I have read the Scriptures
somewhat, and never did I find aught commanding men to
rise up in rebellion against the lawful power.”</p>

<p>“It is true,” answered Parson Drumbleforth. “We are
commanded to honour the King in the same precept
which bids us to fear God. Moreover, we are bound as
faithful servants to yield ourselves to the powers set over
us, for all power is of God, who hath a fatherly care
over His children, and would not allow evil to be done,
though His ways do oft seem mysterious and inscrutable.
Nay, truly, it is not in Holy Writ that any man finds
warrant to rise up against authority.”</p>

<p>Now, Master Oldthwaite shook his head at this, not
liking the turn of the conversation, for he was a
Parliamentarian and supported that cause to his utmost; but
Philip Lisle seized upon the parson’s statement eagerly,
and began to appeal to us who stood round him to help
in the King’s cause.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said he, “ye hear what your vicar saith
as to this matter. The King hath Scripture and reason
on his side. Who can stand against these two? Gentlemen,
in this contest no man can remain undecided. Ye
must choose one side or the other. It must be either
King or Parliament. As for me, I am for the King—God
preserve him!—and whether the fight go well or ill
I will stand by that until the end come. But you, sirs,
will you not join me in serving under his Majesty’s
banner? There are here young and lusty men of able
bodies who might strike many a hearty blow for a good
cause. Come, gentlemen, let me ride back to Nottingham
with a goodly troop of horse behind me. Will
Dale, what sayest thou? John Drumbleforth, thou art
no traitor? Ben Tuckett, there is good stuff in thee.
Francis Wood, thy great arms and broad shoulders
should give many a swinging blow. Come, boys, say
you will go forth like the men you are, to rally round
your sovereign’s standard with the flower of England,
and help him to subdue all his enemies. What! must
I appeal in vain to you, lads of Yorkshire? In old times
men were not slow in coming forward to fight for their
king, and the Yorkshire lads were always in front.”</p>

<p>“Yorkshire favours not the King in this matter, sir,”
said old Master Oldthwaite.</p>

<p>“Faith, sir, you are wrong, then,” said Jack Drumbleforth,
“at least so far as one Yorkshire man is concerned.
For here, Master Lisle, am I. I will go and fight for
the King, an his Majesty will have me. I am not so
tall, but I am exceedingly broad, and ye may rest assured
that wherever I am there will be broken heads. So God
save the King!”</p>

<p>“Oh, John, John!” said the Vicar. “And thou wert
meant for the Church, for a man of peace.”</p>

<p>“Time enow for that, father, when peace comes. I
shall make no worse soldier of the Church for first
splitting a few skulls. Besides, I am a man of muscle,
and of thew and sinew. Yes, I will go with you to the
wars, Master Lisle, whether any others go or not.”</p>

<p>“And I will go with you,” said Francis Wood.</p>

<p>But beyond these two no one spoke. There were
many there who were true to the throne, but they had
their farms to think of, and their families, and their
chief desire was that the tide of war might sweep aside
and leave them and theirs untouched. So Philip Lisle
at that time got small response to his pleading on the
King’s behalf.</p>

<p>There was little more merrymaking that night, and
erelong the guests had gone away along the quiet lanes.
Philip Lisle, Jack, Ben, and I were left talking in the
garden. The women were gossiping together in the
house. As for Parson Drumbleforth, he had ridden
home to his vicarage in his churchwarden’s cart.</p>

<p>“Will,” said Philip Lisle, as we strolled about the
moonlit garden—“Will, you must join us. Here is
Jack, and young Francis Wood will go. You must make
a third; and you, Ben, will you not make a fourth?”</p>

<p>Now, when I had heard Philip Lisle’s appeal, my
heart had felt a great desire to go to the wars, and I was
tempted to say so at the time. But there were so many
hindrances in the way that I could not see my way to
saying that I would follow the King’s standard. For if
I went to fight, who would look after the farm and
defend the women if such times arose as would lead to
their danger? An I had been all alone in those days, I
would have gone willingly enough, and would have
served the King to my last breath. As for the rights
and wrongs of the matter I knew little, nay, I say
frankly enough that I was with the King all through
that terrible time because he was the King, for I am a
Royalist to the backbone. Wrongs there doubtless were,
and maybe somewhat in the nature of oppression, but
for all that he was the King, and we had sworn allegiance
to him. Therefore, I say, I would cheerfully have
followed Philip Lisle to fight under the royal standard
but for the care of my mother and sister and the farm.
What were the women to do without me to guard them;
what would become of my farm and stock if I left them
to the care of others?</p>

<p>“I would go willingly enough if it were not for that,”
said I, explaining my reasons to Philip Lisle. “But it
would seem that duty calls me to abide here presently.”</p>

<p>“Tut, lad,” said he, “duty calls thee to the King’s side.
The women are safe enow here, and as for the farm and
stock, why, thy mother and Jacob Trusty will take good
care of it, I warrant. Come, go with me, Will.”</p>

<p>“Let me think the matter over,” said I. “I am much
inclined to go with you. Think you the war will come
this way?”</p>

<p>“Nay,” he said, “who can say? I think it will not be
of long endurance. The King is getting him a strong
army together, and should read these fellows such a
lesson that they will quickly lay down their arms and
submit themselves to his Majesty’s clemency.”</p>

<p>“Who leads the Parliamentary forces, sir?” asked Jack.</p>

<p>“That is not yet known, lad, but it is said the Earl of
Essex will take command. ’Tis a sober and steady head,
but he hath not the military genius. He will be prudent
and wary, and will fight you a battle admirably on
paper, but he will fail in those flashes of genius which
show the great soldier.”</p>

<p>“And the King, sir, who hath he to advise him?”</p>

<p>“Why, lad, he hath Falkland, and he hath Prince
Rupert, and he hath Hyde—three counsellors from whom
he will gain a diversity of opinions. It is on Rupert
that I rely. There, lads, is a soldier for you! Full of
dash and fire he is, and will lead a cavalry charge against
whatever obstacle comes in his way. Hah! we shall
have some fine times of it when Rupert falls upon these
psalm-singing rascals.”</p>

<p>“Master Oldthwaite would say, sir, that these same
psalm-singing rascals will show fight,” said Jack Drumbleforth.</p>

<p>“Master Oldthwaite, Jack, is a seditious old knave,
or, if that term be too strong, he is not well disposed
towards his Majesty. I fear he will do some harm about
this district, that same Master Oldthwaite.”</p>

<p>“He is not alone,” said Ben Tuckett, “in his advocacy
of the Parliamentary cause. For whether you know it
or not, Master Lisle, this part of the land is not for his
Majesty.”</p>

<p>“I know it well enough, Ben, and there is therefore
the greater need of care in what those say who are for
the King. No, lads, it is the north and west of the land
that favours the King; the south and the east are
against his Majesty, led away as they are by their
agitating leaders.”</p>

<p>“I have heard say,” continued Ben, “that there will
be trouble in our town, for whichever party holds the
Castle, the other will not rest until it hath dislodged it.
Alas! ’tis a sad business, and one that fills me with
much concern.”</p>

<p>“Come with me to the wars then, Ben,” said Jack
Drumbleforth. “I warrant that arm of thine can strike
a blow for the King to some purpose.”</p>

<p>“I am not without some strength,” said Ben, shaking
his fist, “but I shall not use it in this quarrel, Jack,
unless it be to defend myself or my own. What,
because Tom and Bill choose to fall out and fight, is
that any reason why I should get my head broken
between them?”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a false parallel, sir,” said Philip Lisle.</p>

<p>“With submission, sir, ’tis a very true one. Did I
do aught to encourage King and Parliament in going to
war with each other? To tell the truth, I care no jot
for either, being a free man and a burgess. Let them
that made the quarrel settle the quarrel. God grant
that in the settling they ruin not the land!”</p>

<p>This method of dealing with the matter did not seem
to find much favour with Philip Lisle, who only regarded
the subject from one point of view, and liked
not that anyone should deal with it from any other.</p>

<p>“I am sorry, lad,” said he, “that thou hast so little
loyalty to thy sovereign. Young men, however, are not
what they were, for at one time a lusty fellow like thee
would have seized his pike and struck a blow for Merry
England.”</p>

<p>“An it come to striking a blow for Merry England,
sir,” said Ben, “I am with you. Let Spaniard or Turk
so much as set foot within the land, and I will show you
whether or no I will fight. Yea, then I would fight till
I could fight no more. But is this quarrel for England?”</p>

<p>“Yea,” said Philip Lisle, “for England and the liberties
of the English people.”</p>

<p>In that he expressed the sentiments of the Royalists.
It was the watchword of the cause, even as the King
said years later on the fatal scaffold at Whitehall.</p>

<p>“At any rate,” said Jack Drumbleforth, “I am going,
and woe be to the seditious knave that comes in my
way! Who knows? I may carve my way to fortune.
Sir John Drumbleforth would sound well, or even Baron
Drumbleforth. Thou seest, Ben, what a chance thou
art missing—Baron Tuckett, or Sir Benjamin. Well,
God send us all safe out of it!”</p>

<h2>XIV</h2>

<h3>OF THE DISTURBANCE IN PONTEFRACT MARKET- PLACE</h3>

<p>It can hardly be said that Philip Lisle’s appeal to those
gathered together in our barn had met with much
success, for of all the men he spoke to, only two had
promised to go with him, and both these were men
who, however brave, were somewhat of weathercocks,
and apt to turn to whatever their humour tempted them
at chance times. Not that I would say aught against
my dear friend Jack Drumbleforth, who was as brave
and valiant as any man could be. But he had a somewhat
fly-away disposition, this Jack, and was apt to take
sides in a quarrel without knowing much of the matter
in dispute. As for Frank Wood, he had done little all
his life but make love to the girls and crack jokes with
whosoever would talk with him, and he was fond of
excitement and adventure. Both, then, went to the war
more from a liking of change than from inclination,
and neither needed much converting to the King’s side.
And yet there were no braver soldiers fought in that
quarrel than these two, who showed their natural
gallantry many a time, and endured privation and care
for the sake of the cause they had espoused.</p>

<p>“I had hoped to take a goodly company from here,
Will,” said Philip Lisle, “and yet we have got but two
volunteers so far. What do you think—shall I meet
with any success in this neighbourhood?”</p>

<p>Now, I could not rightly answer him as to that, for
I knew little of the feeling round about us, having
rarely spoken to my acquaintance of matters concerning
politics, which in my opinion were the natural concern
of wise men, and not of humble folk like myself. But
it occurred to me that Philip Lisle might easily satisfy
himself on the subject by going with me to the market
at Pontefract, and there making such inquiries among
the people as he thought fit. Which project, when I
mentioned it to him, he warmly commended, and
promised to put in execution.</p>

<p>“Thou seest, Will,” said he, “his Majesty hath been
exceeding gracious to me, who for many a long year
carried on the trade of a robber and a highwayman,
and thus forfeited my life many a time—though, indeed,
I never robbed a poor man in all my life, but only such
as could well afford to disburse. I hold here a free
pardon, and have also served the King faithfully these
many years, and I would fain do something for my
master, if only to show my gratitude. For ’tis a poor
dog, Will, that does not lick the hand that feeds it. An
thou wouldst go with me, Will, I should be content,
though I had but ye three.”</p>

<p>“But, sir, what would my mother and Lucy do—and
your own daughter, Mistress Rose, too—what would
they all do left alone here without protection? And
the farm? Jacob is old and he gets feeble, though none
dare say so in his presence, and things would go to rack
and ruin in my absence.”</p>

<p>“Why,” said he, “we must all risk something when
duty calls. As for Rose, she is well used to taking care
of herself, though indeed it hath somewhat puzzled me
to know how she is to make her way back to Carlisle
while I am away from her.”</p>

<p>“That she must not do, sir,” I answered. “Let her
abide here with my mother and sister, so that she will
have women with her. Maybe things will go on quietly
hereabouts.”</p>

<p>“I fear there will be strife round here, Will. Yonder
castle will prove a bone of contention. However, Rose
shall abide where she is, and she will thank thee herself
for thy kindness.”</p>

<p>“Nay, sir, we want no thanks.” Nor did we, for we
were only too pleased to have Mistress Rose amongst
us. As for me, what with seeing her daily and thinking
about her when I did not see her, I was rapidly becoming
more interested in Rose Lisle than was well for
my peace of mind. Nay, I already looked forward to
some occasion when I might perhaps show my devotion
for her by protecting her from the dangers which seemed
to threaten all of us.</p>

<p>But Ben Tuckett, if he would not go to the wars,
was minded to win some glory by showing his valour
at home, and it presently turned out that he desired
nothing so much as to be the protector and defender
of the women in our house, and more especially of my
sister Lucy. This much I learnt from him in person
the day after the merrymaking, when he was leaving
us to go back to his shop in Pontefract.</p>

<p>“I can see, Will,” said he, “that thou wouldst like to
travel to the wars, and I wonder not at it. If I were a
King’s man like thee, I would go. But I am not. I am
for neither—only I wish they may soon get matters
settled. But if I were thou, I would go.”</p>

<p>“The women, Ben, the women; and the farm! What is to
become of them?”</p>

<p>“Why,” said Benjamin, scratching his head as if a fine
idea had suddenly struck him—“why, how should I do
as a guardian and a caretaker? ’Od’s rats, I know a
good deal about farming, and what I don’t know Jacob
Trusty will teach me. And as for taking care of the
women, ah, I am a famous hand with quarterstaff and
pikestaff, and can strike a blow with anybody.”</p>

<p>“And what of your own affairs, Master Ben—who is
to look after them?”</p>

<p>“Why,” said he, “would it not be possible to combine
the two, think you, Will? For surely ’tis but a step
from Pontefract to Dale’s Field, and I do not see why I
could not watch two birds at once. And then, Will,
thou couldst go to the wars with a light heart.”</p>

<p>“Why, Ben, thou speakest as if it were a matter of joy
to go and fight! Well, I like thy humour. Why, man,
bethink thee! As for me, I see naught but sighs and
sorrowing, tears and bloodshed for many a year to
come.”</p>

<p>“What, do you think it will be as bad as that, Will?
God forbid! However, if thou art minded to fight for
the King, I will see to thy mother and Lucy, and to
Mistress Rose, too. I am not a man of war myself, but
I can defend them, I think, to some purpose.”</p>

<p>Now, it was certainly very kind of my old friend, Ben
Tuckett, to make me so generous an offer, for there is no
doubt that I was powerfully disposed to join the royal
forces, being somewhat inclined to war from my boyhood,
and having often thought over its glories and
adventures as narrated to me by Jacob Trusty, who had
a nice store of learning concerning Agincourt and Creçy.
Again, there was the example of Jack Drumbleforth to
influence me. I liked the idea of fighting shoulder to
shoulder with Jack, who had a sure pluck, and would
brave it out to the last gasp. In short, I was disposed
to go with all my heart, but consideration for domestic
matters held me back.</p>

<p>On the following Saturday, Philip Lisle, Jack
Drumbleforth, and I rode into Pontefract, intending to
see how certain of our acquaintance were disposed
towards the Royalist cause. It was somewhat of a
perilous thing to do, for the townspeople, taking them
as a whole, were on the side of the Parliament, and we
ran a risk of suffering some unpleasantness for our zeal.
Nevertheless, we determined to do what we could,
knowing that there were some at least amongst the men
we should meet there who would hear us with favour,
and maybe respond to our appeal. What Philip Lisle
wanted was men who could turn out equipped and
armed with a good horse apiece, likely to stand some
wear and tear, and true enough to the Royalist cause to
make the quarrel a personal matter.</p>

<p>Now, because it is the centre of a rich agricultural
district, the market at Pontefract is always largely
attended by the neighbouring farmers, so that on market
or fair days there are several hundred people scattered
together in the market-place. There they meet and
collect in groups, selling or buying various commodities
of their trade, or talking together over subjects connected
therewith. And in one part of the market swine are
sold, and in another corn, and in a third cattle, so that
certain streets and alleys are called Pig Market, Beast
Fair, Corn Market, and so forth. In the centre of the
Market-place, and right against the church of St. Giles,
stands the Butter Cross, round which the country wives
congregate to sell their butter and eggs, and where there
is a continual stream of chatter and gossip going on all
day. A busy scene indeed it is on market-day; and as
for the inns, they are as busy as the street, and do a
good trade without intermission, for their doors are
never shut, and the long-settles are always full of thirsty
souls.</p>

<p>We had not been long in the town, and, indeed, had
only just handed over our horses to the care of the ostler
at the inn, when Ben Tuckett, who had returned to his
shop on the previous day, caught sight of us in the
crowd, and beckoned us to come to him. So we edged
our way across the Market-place at Ben’s shop-door,
where he stood looking complacently about him, clad
in a white apron, and appearing the very ideal of a
prosperous tradesman. Jack laughed loudly at the sight
of Ben in his apron, for he looked so consequential and
so important that his pride seemed somewhat like that
of the turkey. When we drew near him, however, Ben’s
look of self-satisfaction changed to one of something like
anxiety, and he drew us after him into his parlour,
which lay behind the shop, and was out of earshot.</p>

<p>“Well,” said Jack, “thou lookest very mysterious,
Master Ben. Art plotting something treasonable, or is
there going to be a rise in candles?”</p>

<p>“There may be a rise in heads before long, Jack,”
answered Ben, who was never put out nor annoyed.
“Hark ye, gentlemen, I have news for you. Since I
returned home last night, which, God knows, I did
reluctantly enough, being so fond of Dale’s Field that I
would—”</p>

<p>“To the point, good Ben, to the point,” said I impatiently.</p>

<p>“Well, then, since I came home, as I said, I have been
making some inquiry amongst my fellows as to how
folks are feeling in this town. Lads, there is not
overmuch good disposition towards the King here. I fear ye
will find little encouragement. I went amongst them
last night and heard them talk,” said Ben, shaking his
head, “and I heard some mighty seditious language,
Master Lisle. Star Chamber—Strafford, Laud, Prynne,
ship-money, tonnage and poundage—these were the
strings continually harped upon. So have a care,
gentlemen, what you say here, for I assure you that the
burgesses are pretty sore, and would, maybe, give a
sorer head to anybody who offended them.”</p>

<p>“That,” said Jack, “is a game which two can play at.”</p>

<p>“What would three of you do against a crowd? And
there is a strong party amongst the magistrates who are
Parliamentarians to the backbone. So, an I were you,
I should keep quiet and leave the King to fight his own
battles.”</p>

<p>“You are a man of prudence, Master Tuckett,” said
Philip Lisle, with a grim smile on his face, “but an
indifferent partisan.”</p>

<p>“That’s true,” said Ben, “I am indifferent, because I
care for neither party. As for me, I say, ‘A plague o’
both your houses.’ God send ye ruin not my shop in
your quarrels.”</p>

<p>But in spite of Ben’s advice we went away from him
still determined to do what we could. Nevertheless, as
prudent men, we did not deem it advisable to draw upon
us the notice of those who, as Ben said, favoured the
Parliament. But we went amongst the crowd as if
intent on our business or pleasure, speaking here to one
and there to another, always selecting such as I knew to
be well-disposed to the King, and doing what we could
to induce likely looking fellows to join in with us. And
amongst the yeomanry and the farmers, especially the
younger men, we found many a man willing enough to
join the Royalist army and to find horse and arms, but
held back by the same obstacles which held me. There
was a wife and child to protect, or an aged mother to
care for; there were the farm and stock to manage, and
so on. But we had many an expression of good-will,
and many a promise to do the right thing if occasion
came that way.</p>

<p>Now, as we moved about amongst the crowd, I noticed
that we were watched more than once by old Master
Oldthwaite, who, as you will remember, expressed his
sentiments somewhat freely at my merrymaking a few
nights before. I knew Master Oldthwaite to be a strong
partisan of the Parliamentary party, for I had heard
him say that no king at all was better than a bad king,
and he oft gave utterance to severe gibes and taunts
against Laud and the bishops, saying that they were
wolves which ate up the sheep, rather than shepherds
that took care of their flocks. He was indeed somewhat
celebrated in Pontefract for his sentiments, for as he
carried on the trade of a corn-dealer in that town, he
was often heard in the inn-parlours, where the tradesmen
meet to discuss all sorts of matters. Nevertheless,
since I and my father before me had had many a
transaction with Master Oldthwaite, and always been
good friends with him, I did not think he would do me
an injury or conspire against any friend of mine. But
it would appear that his political sympathies overcame
his better feelings, for he took steps which presently
resulted in much inconvenience to me and my companions.</p>

<p>It was drawing towards evening, and we three were
standing in a quiet corner in the market square, conversing
with a knot of young farmers, who were listening
with great attention while Philip Lisle talked to them.
There were a great many people round about us, and
the noise and bustle of the market was as great as ever.
Looking round I caught sight of Master Nicholas Pratt,
a magistrate of the town, making for us through the
crowd, followed in the rear by Master Oldthwaite and
several others whom I knew to be stanch Parliamentarians.
And then I felt that something was about to
happen. In which presentiment I was not wrong, for
Master Pratt, coming hastily to us, cried in a rough and
insolent tone:</p>

<p>“How now, gentlemen, what do you mean by turning
this public market into a recruiting-ground for the
King? Do you not know that you are committing a
breach of the peace?”</p>

<p>Now, we had all three, and those with us, turned
upon him when he first spoke, and we now stared at him
with astonishment. He was a large round-bellied man,
with impudent manners and much pride, and as he
stood swelling over us, I was reminded of our great
turkey-cock at home.</p>

<p>“No, sir,” said Philip Lisle, “we do not know that we
are breaking the peace.”</p>

<p>“Are you not recruiting for that traitor, Charles
Stuart?” shouted the other, getting very red and fiery.</p>

<p>“We are recruiting for his Majesty the King, sir,”
answered Philip Lisle, “as we have a right to do.”</p>

<p>“We will not have it in this free town, sir. Get you
gone to where you came from. You are not known
here. And you, Masters Dale and Drumbleforth, have
a care what you do, and do not disgrace yourselves by
associating yourselves with adventurers and braggadocios.”</p>

<p>“What, sir!” cried Philip Lisle, laying his hand on
his sword, “do you dare to insult one of his Majesty’s.
officers?”</p>

<p>“Officers, quotha!” shouted a mocking voice from
behind the magistrate. “Why, sirs, ’tis Black Phil, the
highwayman. Pretty officer! If the King’s officers are
of this kidney he must have scoured them from the gaols.”</p>

<p>Now, Philip Lisle was so much enraged at this insult
that he instantly drew his sword, and rushed forward to
wreak his vengeance on the speaker. This was the
signal for an immediate raising of sticks and staves, and
Jack and I, nothing loath, got back to back behind Philip
Lisle and began to lay about us with energy, so that
there was some very pretty fighting went on for the
space of five or six minutes. But we were outnumbered
by twelve to one, and presently Philip and Jack received
such blows that they fell, and I was powerless.</p>

<p>“Carry them into my cellar,” shouted Pratt to his men,
“and lock them up there till such time as justice can be
done upon them.”</p>

<p>And therewith they haled us across the Market-place
and shoved us into the magistrate’s cellar, and locked us
up with our bruises and our reflections, which just then
were not at all pleasant.</p>

<h2>XV</h2>

<h3>OF OUR ESCAPE FROM THE MAGISTRATE’S CUSTODY</h3>

<p>Now, what with the noise and confusion of the last few
minutes, taken together with a somewhat hard blow that
lighted upon the back of my head, I was so dazed and
astonished that it was some moments before I fully
recovered my senses. However, when I became master
of myself, there I was, sure enough, in the cellar
underneath the worthy magistrate’s house. A remarkably
dull and quiet place it was, and felt very damp and cold
to my touch when I stretched out my hands and encountered
the walls and floor on which we had been unceremoniously
thrown. There was rather more than a
little water trickling down those walls, and my fingers
encountering it bred in me a feeling of much resentment
against our captors for treating us in such scurvy
fashion. Moreover, the hole was so dark that I could
see nothing, and there was not a single ray of light
penetrating through niche or crevice. A most disagreeable
place it indeed was, and doubly so to me, who until
that moment had never been curtailed of my lawful liberty.</p>

<p>While I was dimly recognising these matters, the rap
on my head still troubling me somewhat, I was startled
by a groan close at my left hand. This was succeeded
by a succession of snorts and sniffs, as if some person
were slowly awaking from a sound slumber, and presently
my ears were saluted by the voice of Jack Drumbleforth,
who had evidently been bundled into the cellar in a much
more damaged state than myself.</p>

<p>“Plague on it!” said Jack, as if grumbling to himself;
“my head hums like a church tower in ringing time.
Where on earth are we that ’tis so dark? Methinks this
couch is not of the softest. Will—Will Dale! “</p>

<p>“I am near thee, Jack.”</p>

<p>“Hah!” said he. “Well, I knew thou wouldst not be
far away. Where are we, Will? Fighting we were, I
know; and some ugly crop-eared varlet gave me a foul
blow from the rear, and then—why, then, I remember
little more.”</p>

<p>“Nor I, Jack, for someone treated me after the same
fashion. But, Jack, where is Philip Lisle?”</p>

<p>“Plague on it! he was with us too. Nay, they may
have killed honest Philip outright!”</p>

<p>“It may be that he is in this hole with us,” I said,
beginning to feel around me in the darkness.
“Stretch out your arms, Jack, and search for him.”</p>

<p>Now, the whole place was so black that I was almost
afraid to get on my legs and explore it, lest I should fall
down some sudden pit in the floor, and thus come to
worse things. However, I rose up, and cautiously felt
around me, meeting with naught but damp walls and a
slippery floor. Further off I heard Jack grumbling at
our fate, and uttering many condemnations upon those
who had brought us to it.</p>

<p>“An I had his worship down here,” said Jack, “I
would teach him better than to throw three gentlemen
such as we into this vile fox-hole. What, things are
come to a pretty pass indeed when a round-bellied old
butcher like yonder shallow-pated graybeard sits on the
bench to administer justice! Where art thou, Will?
As for me, I am wandering in Stygian darkness.”</p>

<p>“Do you feel aught of Master Lisle, Jack?”</p>

<p>“Nay, lad, I have felt naught yet save this greasy
floor and these damp walls. This— Ah, here is
something, Will, under my foot. ’Tis a man! I swear
’tis poor Master Lisle.”</p>

<p>By that time I had felt my way towards Jack’s direction,
and I stooped down and laid my hand on the body.</p>

<p>“Master Lisle it is, Jack, and none other. Pray God
he is not dead! Nay, his heart beats, and he breathes.
If we had but a cup of water!”</p>

<p>“God be praised!” said Jack. “I have a bottle of
cordial in my pocket, which I bought of Master Sage, the
apothecary, for old Deborah, our housekeeper. She
useth it for the falling sickness, but ’tis my opinion that
it hath somewhat of strong waters in it, and is not
ungrateful to the palate. What do you say, Will; shall
we pour a drop into his mouth?”</p>

<p>“Quick, Jack, uncork the bottle and let me try it. I
am holding his head on my knee. Can you feel him in
the darkness? Pour it gently between his lips.”</p>

<p>“Plague on this black hole!” said Jack. “I have
poured a good half down his doublet. Hold his head
steady, Will. There, good Master Lisle, how is it with
you? ’Tis a fine cordial this, Will, and strong enough
to bring a dead horse to life. There, thou seest, he is
coming round. Shall I dose him again?”</p>

<p>“Gently, Jack, do not choke him. Thy cordial smells
like strong waters.”</p>

<p>“Good faith, lad, ’tis little else. Shouldst see our old
Deborah smack her lips over it! ‘A little drop, Master
John,’ she says, ‘the leastest drop in the world, Master
John, is a fine thing for a sinking heart.’ So ho!
Master Lisle, pull yourself together, man!”</p>

<p>Now, the effect of the cordial was so praiseworthy that
Philip Lisle began to cough and then to struggle in my
arms, and finally raised his hand to his head and uttered
a most fervent groan, which, though dismal enough in
itself, was to me the sweetest music I ever heard. For
I had feared he was mortally hurt, and then what should
I have said to Mistress Rose if ever we got out of that
black abyss again?</p>

<p>“How do you now, sir?” said Jack.</p>

<p>“Oh!” said Philip Lisle. “My head rings like is it
you, Jack, and where are we, and where is Will Dale?”</p>

<p>“Here I am, sir, holding you up,” said I.</p>

<p>“And I am here, holding the cordial,” said Jack. “Try
another drop, sir—’tis, I assure you, the right sort.”</p>

<p>“They have clapped us into gaol, I suppose,” said
Philip Lisle, having again drunk of the contents of
Mistress Deborah’s bottle. “Well, ’tis dark enow for
aught.”</p>

<p>“This is no gaol,” said Jack, “but only his worship’s
cellar, and a damp hole it is. We are like to have the
ague an we lie here much longer, let alone the rheumatics.
However, ’tis the fortune of war.”</p>

<p>“Let me stand up,” said Philip Lisle. “Alack, lads,
my head feels sore where yonder snub-nosed rogue struck
me with his quarter-staff. Well, how long are we like to
remain here, I wonder?”</p>

<p>“Till master magistrate can do justice upon us, I
should think,” said Jack.</p>

<p>“Why, man, what breach of the peace have we committed?
We are in the right; ’tis they who are in the
wrong, rebels and traitors that they are!”</p>

<p>“Yea, surely,” said Jack; “but they have might on
their side, and might, they say, is right all the world
over. However, what care I? When I elected to fight,
I did not expect to fight with a branch of asphodel. Let
us be as content as possible. If we had somewhat to
sit upon, and a little food and drink, I could live till
morning.”</p>

<p>Now, it appeared as if our captors were going to leave
us in that dark and uncomfortable lodging all night, for
what seemed to be a long space of time went by before
we heard aught of any of them. But at last, when we
had despaired of any succour, the noise of a bolt and
chain greeted our ears, and suddenly a door, somewhat
above our heads, was opened, and a light streamed in
upon us, revealing the figures of the choleric magistrate
who had captured us, and of two or three of his men.
This small group looked down upon us with something
of triumph in their faces.</p>

<p>“So, my fine birds,” quoth his worship, “so ye are
caged at last, and are like to have your wings clipped.
A pretty pass we are come to, when such as ye incite
honest citizens to war and bloodshed!”</p>

<p>“Sir,” said Philip Lisle, “I am an officer holding his
Majesty’s commission, and—”</p>

<p>But at this he was interrupted by a burst of violent
laughter.</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed?” said the old man. “Thou art a noted
highwayman, robber, and thief, fellow. An officer, eh?
Methinks the King would have done better to set apart
some officer to see justice done upon thee at Tyburn.
And you, Master Dale, a respectable yeoman, how can
you associate yourself with folk like these? Fie on you,
Master Dale!”</p>

<p>“Sir,” I said, “I know not what you mean, but I am
very sure that I shall punish those who have placed me
here. Let us go at once about our liberty, sir. You
have no right to detain us.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” quoth he, “if we have not right, we have power.
We are for the Commonwealth in this town, lads, and
will have no Star Chamber spies amongst us. Fie on
you, Master Dale! And you, John Drumbleforth, fie on
you! A parson’s son, and thus early led astray. But
what can ye expect? These parsons are but wolves that
rob the starved sheep, and their brood is no better.”</p>

<p>“Sir,” said Jack, “if you refer to my father, I make
free to tell you that you are a liar. For my father is as
good a shepherd as ever wore cassock and bands, though
indeed he prayeth not at the street-corners, as I hear
your worship is fond of doing.”</p>

<p>Now, it would appear that the worthy man was somewhat
used to air his religion, so that Jack touching him
in a tender spot, he presently withdrew in a great
passion, bidding his men bolt and chain us up again
until our proud stomachs were cooled. Which they with
alacrity did, so that we were once more left to the damp
and darkness of the cellar.</p>

<p>This sad fate seemed peculiarly hard to Jack and to
myself, who had never known what it was to have key
turned upon us in our lives, and who were, moreover,
not accustomed to be treated in such summary fashion.
The sound of the bolting and chaining of our prison-door
grated very harshly upon our ears, and when the
sound had died away and all was silent, we each gave
vent to a dismal sigh.</p>

<p>“Nay, lads,” said Philip Lisle, “you must not give way
at a trifling matter like this. What! ’tis nothing to be
shut up in a hole like this for an hour or two.”</p>

<p>“With submission, sir,” said Jack, “it seems to me a
good deal, and your hour or two is like to be all night at
least. Moreover, where are we going to find food and
light? A comfortable night’s lodging we are like to
have, upon my word!”</p>

<p>“Courage, Jack,” said I. “We shall manage to keep
ourselves alive, I doubt not. I pray there be no rats in
these cellars.”</p>

<p>“Rats!” said Jack. “Ah! I see how it is. We are
to be eaten alive. These cellars, now—it seems to me,
Will, that I remember something of them in our schooldays.”</p>

<p>“Why, of course, Jack. Do you not remember
Samuel Penn, the stout lad, whose father kept the
cooper’s shop over against the Cross? We played many
a game of hide-and-seek with Sam under that shop.
Five or six doors away from this it is, and I warrant
these are similar cellars. If so, we might wander in
here a good while ere we came at an end.”</p>

<p>Which was true enough, for the cellars under those
ancient houses in the Market-place at Pontefract are so
extensive in size that you might easily mistake them for
natural caverns. They are all hewn out of the solid
rock, and have so many twistings and turnings and odd
nooks and corners, that one might hide there with safety
from a foe. Some of them, again, are connected by
secret passages with various parts of the town, such as
the Castle and the Priory of the White Friars, while
others have secret staircases by which men could escape
to the roof and leave no one the wiser. Designed for
safety and protection they doubtless were in the ancient
days, and being underground, they are still in the same
condition as they were two hundred years ago.</p>

<p>Now, after we had remained some time in his worship’s
cellar, we began to grow very weary, and would fain
have reposed ourselves if there had been aught to sit
upon.</p>

<p>“What scurvy dogs are these,” said Jack, “that will
not give an honest enemy so much as a three-legged
stool to sit upon! I never remember my legs aching so
much before.”</p>

<p>“I am going to sit on the floor, lads,” said Philip, “and
I advise you to follow my example. Take off your
doublets and fold them into a cushion on which to sit.
It will at least keep the damp away from you somewhat.”</p>

<p>“What!” said Jack. “So we are to sit upon our
doublets all night, like a tailor on a table, without
support for back or head. Fine work truly! However, we
will lay it up against master magistrate, and charge him
royally for it when pay-time comes.”</p>

<p>Now, it seemed to me that we should be much more
comfortable if we all sat back to back, so that each
would lean against the other. Which plan I proposed
and carried out, so that in a few minutes we were all
sitting in a triangle on the cellar-floor, with our knees
drawn up to our chins. And after that the night seemed
to pass on slowly indeed.</p>

<p>It might be about midnight, though indeed it seemed
to me and my companions much later, when I became
conscious—for I had dozed somewhat—of a very low
voice whispering to us through the darkness:</p>

<p>“Hist! hist! hist!”</p>

<p>“Who calls!’ I said in a low voice.</p>

<p>“Is it thee, Will?” whispered a familiar voice.</p>

<p>“Yes, and here is Jack and Master Lisle,” said I.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis I, Ben Tuckett,” said the low voice. “Are you
watched at all, Will?”</p>

<p>“Nay,” I said, “there is naught to see us by here.
Where are you, good Ben?”</p>

<p>“Hush!” said he. “I will show a light.”</p>

<p>Presently there was a faint glimmer of light through
a niche above the wall at our right-hand side. We rose
from our cramped position and drew near to it.</p>

<p>“There is a door here,” whispered Ben through the
crack, “if only I can find the spring. Ye see, lads, his
worship’s shop is next to mine, so when I heard that he
had thrown you into his cellar and meant to detain you
there all night, I came down into my own cellar and
began searching about for this door, of which I had
heard. Beshrew me! ’tis mighty hard to push back
this same spring in the wall. Ah! there it is—but come
forth quietly, gentlemen, for I would not have them
know how you got out for all I am worth.”</p>

<p>While he spoke he had found the spring and caused
the stone to revolve, and we now passed out through a
narrow slit in the wall, and found ourselves in worthy
Ben Tuckett’s cellar, and at liberty once more.</p>

<h2>XVI</h2>

<h3>OF OUR FLIGHT FROM THAT NEIGHBOURHOOD</h3>

<p>Now, when he had brought us into a place of safety, and
had seen us lodged in somewhat more comfortable
fashion than that we had lately enjoyed, our deliverer
sat himself down before us and looked at us with a severe
countenance.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said Ben, “you have truly brought misfortune
upon yourselves, if not upon others. Did I not
tell you that you would get sore heads if you strove to
further the King’s cause in this place? Was I not
right? For sore heads you have, if I mistake not; and
as for me, here I am helping ye to sneak out of my
neighbour’s cellar as if we were all thieves.”</p>

<p>“Peace, thou chattering knave!” said Jack. “Thieves,
indeed! Why, Master Ben, what does this mean?”</p>

<p>“Like thieves, I said, Jack. Alas! you do not know
what risks I am running, for the folk here are so bitter
against Strafford and the Star Chamber that they would
never buy of me again an it were known that I am a
Royalist. For a Royalist I am, lads, if I am aught.”</p>

<p>“Dear lad,” said I earnestly, “be whatever you please,
Royalist or Roundhead, but at present, for the love of
Heaven, give us something to eat and drink, for we are
nigh famished. At least,” I added, “I am, whatever my
companions are.”</p>

<p>“Famished am I,” said Jack. “Hast got by any
chance, Ben, a meat-pie? A meat-pie—with eggs, hah?
And ale, Ben—a large can of ale.”</p>

<p>“Why,” said Ben, scratching his left ear as if the
matter perplexed him, “I dare say I could find something
of that sort, but, lads, how shall I hide your presence
from my household? There are two ’prentices upstairs
that might perhaps keep the thing secret, but the
housekeeper—alack, she would noise it abroad in a moment,
and then where should we all be?”</p>

<p>“Show me the way to the pantry,” said Jack. “Let
me fend for myself.”</p>

<p>“Why,” said Ben, still scratching his ear, “if you could
put up without forks and plates, and could all drink out
of one horn—”</p>

<p>“Good Ben,” said Jack, “only produce the food and
drink, and we will show thee what we can do without.
Man, ’tis twelve hours since bite or sup passed these
lips.”</p>

<p>Thus adjured, Ben went softly away to visit his larder,
and erelong returned bearing a huge pasty of meat and
a great jack full of ale, at sight of which Jack’s eyes
glistened exceedingly, as no doubt did my own also.
And after that there was silence for a space, during
which our jaws made up for what our tongues lacked.
As for myself, I was as hungry as a hunter, and felt
greatly relieved when I had eaten and drunk. Then,
too, I felt my spirits revive, and longed to meet the mob
once more by whose overpowering numbers we had been
beaten down and forced into the magistrate’s cellar.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said Jack, having swallowed the last mouthful
of ale from the can, “I am myself once more. After all,
there is naught like food and drink for setting a man up
again. Master Lisle, how is it with you?”</p>

<p>“My head rings, Jack, my head rings yet. There is a
lump the size of a hen’s egg on the back of it. However,
let us be thankful. We have escaped, thanks to worthy
Master Tuckett here.”</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said Ben, “I want no thanks, ’Twas
well for you I knew the little secret. But now, lads,
what are you going to do?”</p>

<p>“Do! Ride home at once,” said I.</p>

<p>“Ride home? But they have placed your horses
under lock and key.”</p>

<p>Now, we had never thought of what might become of
our horses, and when Ben gave us this news we looked
at each other in amazement. Philip Lisle, indeed,
jumped to his feet as if he would at once go forth to
release his own animal.</p>

<p>“Perdition seize them!” said he. “I am naught without
my horse, old as he is. He and I have had many a
narrow shave, and have escaped all dangers. Where
have they stowed our horses, Master Tuckett?”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said Ben, “they are where you left them—at
the Peck of Malt, but master landlord has had orders to
give them to nobody save a magistrate’s man. Under
lock and key they are at this moment.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” said Philip Lisle, “an that be all, we shall not
have much trouble in releasing them. If you, Will, can
show me the ins and outs of the place, I will engage to
have them under us in half an hour.”</p>

<p>“And where will you go then?” asked Ben.</p>

<p>“To Dale’s Field,” said I.</p>

<p>“Better not at present,” said he. “For I heard to-night
that they have sent there to search for papers, and it
might go ill with you to present yourselves there. They
have some mighty grievance against you, Master Lisle,
and indeed I heard certain persons swear that you should
hang ere two days went by, which God forfend, for ’tis
a poor death.”</p>

<p>“Bah!” said Philip Lisle. “The rope is not spun,
good Ben, that will hang me. However, Will, what
Ben says is good. Let us absent ourselves for awhile
from this part of the country and return later on. What
say you; and you, Jack, what have you to say?”</p>

<p>“I am good for anything,” said Jack. “It matters not
to me whether we are here or there.”</p>

<p>“But what shall we do about those at home?” I
inquired. “How can we leave them? Who knows,
indeed, what may have happened already?”</p>

<p>“Nay, man, let them search for what papers they will.
They will find naught at Dale’s Field, either of yours or
mine. And I will not believe that Englishmen will
cause trouble to innocent women. When they find
naught they will go away and leave the house in peace.”</p>

<p>“But they will not leave you in peace,” said Ben, “for
I heard that they were determined, being strong
Parliamentarians, to put a stop to your recruiting tactics,
Master Lisle. So therefore I say—take yourselves to
some safe place for a season.”</p>

<p>“To the King’s camp!” said Philip.</p>

<p>“Agreed,” said Jack. “Come, Will, in for a penny, in
for a pound. Let us with Master Lisle to the King and
see what we can do there. You can return soon if you
think it well.”</p>

<p>Now, my blood was somewhat heated by the exciting
adventure of the day, and I felt mightily inclined to fall
in with Philip Lisle’s counsel. I knew that Ben Tuckett
would see to the safety of my mother and sister and of
Rose Lisle; and as to the farm, my mother and Jacob
Trusty would manage that. However, I did not anticipate
any trouble in our neighbourhood, for I felt sure
that matters would soon settle themselves, seeing that
we were not fond of war and liked trading and moneymaking
mightily better.</p>

<p>“Well,” said I, “then I will go with you, but I shall
hold myself free to return homewards whenever I please.
But now, gentlemen, there are our horses to consider.
Are we to leave them where they are, and if so, how are
we to get away on foot?”</p>

<p>But it was out of the question that we should leave
the horses. Philip Lisle, indeed, would not have left
Cæsar for all the gold of Peru, and as the other two
beasts were mine—one of them my own mount and the
other lent to Jack—I did not feel inclined to surrender
them to people who had no right to their custody. So
we immediately set to work making some plan whereby
we could rescue the three animals from the stable where
they were secured.</p>

<p>“I am not fond of fighting,” said Ben Tuckett, “but I
am a rare hand at a plot. Gentlemen, hearken to me.
Jack, you know the house that lies amongst the trees,
’twixt here and Carleton, at the corner of the lane
leading from Baghill?”</p>

<p>“Truly,” said Jack; “old Master Hull lives there.”</p>

<p>“That he doth not, because he is dead this three weeks,
wherefore the house is shut up and desolate. Now, Jack,
I will let thee out through my garden here at the back,
and you must take Master Lisle across the fields beneath
Friars’ Wood and lie by that house until Will and I
bring the horses to you, which I promise you we will not
be long in doing. And now, friends, you shall have
another mouthful of ale and then away.”</p>

<p>Now, our task in getting easily away from Ben
Tuckett’s house was a light one, for those ancient houses
in the Market-place have long out-buildings and gardens
in their rear, and at the foot of them is Southgate, and
beyond that there lies a stretch of open country, dipping
down into a valley and then rising again until it reaches
the village of Carleton a mile away. Across the garden
and fields it would be easy enough to steal unobserved,
and thereafter we should have no difficulty in riding
away. To secure our cattle, however, was a difficult
matter, for they were lodged at an inn which stood right
in the heart of the town, and were, therefore, hard to
come at. Nevertheless we were determined not to leave
them without a struggle.</p>

<p>Presently, then, Ben conducted Jack Drumbleforth and
Philip Lisle out through his rear premises and set them
across the fields to the house lately occupied by Master
Hull. A fairly dark night it was by good chance, and
therefore gave us all the better prospect of escape. It
was past midnight when Ben came back from letting
them out at the rear gate, and everything was quiet as
the grave.</p>

<p>“Now, Will,” said he, “we will go out by the same way,
for it will not do for me to unbar my front-door at this
time o’ night. Let us pass round the town to Church
Lane and there see how the land lies.”</p>

<p>So we stole forth, climbing more than one garden wall
in our desire to keep concealed from the sight of any who
might be about at that hour, and presently we got round
to the north side of the Market-place and went quietly
up the narrow lane that leads to St. Giles’ Church. In
this lane were the stables which held our beasts, and as
the lane itself was paved with rough boulders it was quite
impossible to bring them out by that way.</p>

<p>Arrived in front of the stables we held a council of
war. There was evidently no one on guard; they had
contented themselves with locking the horses in a separate
stable. Our work, then, was to find some means of
picking the lock and afterwards getting the animals out
without awakening the people of the inn.</p>

<p>“This is the stable,” said Ben, whispering with his lips
close to my ear. “I sent one of my ’prentices round when
I heard they had seized your horses, and bade him find
out which they were confined in. This it is—the door
next to the great water-butt.”</p>

<p>“But how shall we pick the lock, Ben?”</p>

<p>“I have the necessary implements under my cloak.”</p>

<p>“But once inside, how can we bring out the horses
without noise? Their feet will raise a clatter on these
cobbles.”</p>

<p>“I am not sure,” said Ben, “but I have an idea that
from this stable there is a door into a fold beyond. If it
be so we can get away easily, Will. But if not—why,
we must chance cobble-stones and everything and ride
for it!”</p>

<p>While Ben spoke he had pulled out a great chisel,
with which he forced out the staple to which the padlock
was attached in the stable-door, so that we entered very
easily, and presently stood by the horses, who were quiet
and peaceful, as though they knew themselves to be in
prison.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis as I thought,” said Ben, “there is a door that
leads into the fold. From the fold there is a gate opening
into the fields. There is another lock gone, anyway.
And now, Will, let us get the beasts out. There is manure
in this fold right up to the stable-door, so none will hear
if we walk a troop of horses across.”</p>

<p>Now, my own two horses, knowing my voice and the
touch of my hand, came readily enough with me, and I
had them out of their stalls and in Ben’s hand in the
fold in a moment; but Cæsar, who was never harnessed
by any other hand than his master’s, was somewhat
frightened, and trembled as I strove to pacify him, so
that I grew anxious lest he should make a stir and bring
down the landlord and his men upon us. However, by
dint of coaxing and free use of his name I got him out of
the stable and led him myself across the fold, Ben
following with the other two horses. And presently we were
out in the open fields, where we both mounted, I leading
Cæsar by his bridle, and Ben riding Jack’s horse. Cæsar
was plainly frightened and suspicious, for he knew that
his master was not with him, and would now and then
stop and listen as he went along, so that our progress
was interrupted continually. It was necessary, too, to
make a long round in getting to the appointed meeting-place,
for we had to skirt the town, passing round Tanshelf and
the high ground over against the Priory, before
we came to the lonely house where Jack and Philip
waited for us. Then indeed there was much rejoicing
’twixt Philip Lisle and his horse—nay, they could not
have understood each other better if they had spoken a
common tongue.</p>

<p>“And now, gentlemen,” said Ben, “I will go back and
leave you to your own devices. Will, if thou goest
to the war, I will see to the women at Dale’s Field.
Make thy mind easy on that score. Jack, if thou seest
fighting, remember thy old tricks. And so farewell,
friends all, and God send ye good fortune and a safe
return.”</p>

<p>And therewith he gave us a clasp of the hand and
vanished into the darkness, while we, clapping spurs to
our animals, set out in the direction of Dale’s Field,
riding past Carleton and climbing the lower part of
Went Hill, so that we might the sooner strike into the
North Road.</p>

<p>Now, when we came to the old familiar homestead, and
could just make out its roofs and gables in the darkness,
a great wave of feeling came over me that I should do
wrong to forsake it and those whom it sheltered. It was
my duty after all to stay there and defend it and them.
And so I turned my horse’s head to the orchard gate and
drew rein.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said I, “ride on and leave me here. I
cannot go with you and leave all I have in these troublous
times. It is best that you should go, but not that I
should go with you. Go on therefore and let me stay.”</p>

<p>“You are right, Will,” said Philip Lisle, after a pause.
“Yes, it is best that you should stay and that we should
go. You shall hear of us soon. Take care of Rose, Will.
And so, farewell.”</p>

<p>I grasped his hand and promised, and then gave my
hand to Jack, who squeezed it between his own.</p>

<p>“Good-bye, Will,” said Jack. “I wish thou hadst gone
with us, but ’tis best not, considering the women. Well,
perchance we shall get news of thee. Farewell.”</p>

<p>And so they rode away, and I, standing at the orchard
gate, heard the sound of their horses’ feet dying into
silence far off along the road.</p>

<h2>XVII</h2>

<h3>OF THE EVENTS WHICH FOLLOWED</h3>

<p>I cannot deny that when I heard the last ring of the
horses’ feet, and realized that Philip and Jack were
gone, perhaps to great adventures, I was somewhat
downcast at the thought of being left behind, and once
the notion did come into my mind to ride after and join
them. But then I thought again of my mother, and
sister, and Rose Lisle, and felt that it was my duty to
protect them. And so I opened the orchard-gate, and
went down the familiar paths and put my horse in his
stable, and afterwards went to bed and slept soundly,
being somewhat worn out with my doings that day.</p>

<p>Now I expected, when I awoke next morning, to hear
that Master Nicholas Pratt had sent some of his men
after me, for he had proved himself so very much in
earnest about our capture that I did not think he would
be content to let his birds fly without some attempt to
regain them. But there were no magistrates’ men there
when I left my chamber, and none came during the
morning. Also it would seem that Ben Tuckett had
been misinformed as to their having sent men to search
for papers at Dale’s Field, for my mother had had no
visitor of that kind on the previous day. So, having
remained at home during the morning, so as to be in
readiness if Master Pratt and his crew desired to ask
questions of me, I considered that my duty was done;
and in the afternoon I walked across the meadows to
service at Darrington church, being accompanied by
Lucy and Mistress Rose. And we had no sooner got
into church than I beheld Ben Tuckett, seated in the
corner of the nave and watching the door. When he
saw me he pulled a wry face and seemed much surprised,
but he was fain to keep his astonishment to
himself until evensong was over, which he did with
evident discomfort, his eyes constantly wandering over
his book to make sure that it was really me whom he
saw.</p>

<p>“How now, Will?” said he, joining me in the porch
as soon as the last “Amen” was pronounced. “I thought
thou hadst been a hundred miles away by this time.
Where, then, are Jack and Master Lisle?”</p>

<p>“A good way on the road, Ben, I hope. As for me,
I thought it best to stay here and protect the women.”</p>

<p>“I dare say you are right, Will,” he answered. “Nevertheless,
I would have done my best in that direction.
Yea, indeed, I was on my way now to see how they
fared, having called in here to see if Lucy perchance
came to service.”</p>

<p>“You were wrong last night, Ben,” I said. “There
was no search for any papers at Dale’s Field. Neither
has any person of Master Pratt’s sending been here this
morning.”</p>

<p>“So I heard in town before setting forth,” answered
Ben, “and I heard also that Master Pratt was somewhat
exceeding his duty yesterday, and is now being heartily
laughed at for what has befallen him. Certainly ’tis
true that most of the magistrates and aldermen are for
the Parliament, but the mayor is not, and he hath the
military to support him. And so I fancy, Will, that you
will hear no more of last night’s affair. And now I
perceive that the girls have ceased greeting their
acquaintance, Will, so let us cross the fields with them.”</p>

<p>And therewith he walked off with Lucy, having by
that time arrived at a perfect understanding with her,
while I followed after with Mistress Rose, with whom,
you may be quite sure, I was not averse to walk and
talk, being daily more attracted by her many virtues
and graces. Only I was always somewhat tongue-tied
when with her, for she seemed so far above me that I
never knew what to say or how to say it.</p>

<p>Ben Tuckett was quite right in saying that we should
hear no more of the previous night’s adventure. Nor
did we, save that there were certain people in Pontefract
Market-place next Saturday who jested with me respecting
my tenancy of Master Nicholas Pratt’s cellar, seeming
to regard the matter as highly diverting. But there
were others who looked upon me very blackly, and
whispered each to other as I went along, these persons
being persistent Parliamentarians who wished not well
to the King and his servants. Also I met full face in
the streets Master Pratt himself, and could not help
smiling in his face, so diverted did I feel at the sight
of him. Whereupon, he grew very red in countenance,
and looked angrily at me.</p>

<p>“Have a care, Master Dale,” quoth he, “have a care!
I may have thee in ward again presently, and thou shalt
not escape then, I promise thee.”</p>

<p>But I laughed more at that, and went further along
the street, where I met the mayor, Master Richard
Oates, with whom I stayed to exchange a word.</p>

<p>“Do not vex Master Pratt,” said he, when I told him
of my recent encounter. It will not do, Master Dale,
to recruit for the King publicly in our town. For see
you, there is so much feeling about the Star Chamber
and such-like things, that I think the people are of
Master Pratt’s way of thinking. To be sure, ’tis a
choleric man and a zealous partisan, but it will be
well not to vex him. Tut, man, what need to make
more enemies than we can help? Do you attend to
your farm, Master Dale, and leave politics alone. Your
friend Lisle hath left these parts, I hear?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” I said. “He has gone to the King, and
John Drumbleforth, our parson’s son, with him.”</p>

<p>“So Jack has gone? Well, well, ’tis a harum-scarum
young lad, but with as good a heart as ever beat. Alas!
I mind how skilfully he robbed my orchard. But do
not thou go to the wars, Will Dale. There will be
fighting, sure enow, and ’tis thy place to protect thy
womenkind. But do not recruit here again, Will.”</p>

<p>I had no mind to do that, for it was plain to me that
the burgesses of Pontefract, taken as a body, were much
more in favour of Parliament than King, and were
inclined to break the head of anyone who went against
them. Not, indeed, that his Majesty had no supporters
in these parts, for of the gentry and clergy he had
plenty, in addition to the garrison of the Castle, under
Colonel Lowther, a right valiant commander. For when
the King erected his standard, and called upon all true
subjects to aid him in subduing his rebellious Parliament,
there were many gallant gentlemen showed themselves
ready to espouse his cause, and give time and
money to serve him. Most, indeed, of the great families
in our parts did liberally contribute to the royal
exchequer at this time, giving, according to their means,
from one hundred to many thousands of pounds in
money. Moreover, they formed companies of their
tenantry and supported them at their own expense, and
they provisioned the Castle against the siege which was
expected, and formed themselves and their companies
into a garrison, and in this and other ways did all they
could to further the King’s cause. Such were Sir
William Lowther, Colonel Middleton, Colonel Wheatley,
Major Dennis, and many others, besides the gentlemen
volunteers, which were formed into four divisions,
commanded respectively by Colonel Grey, son of Lord Grey,
of Warke, in Northumberland, Sir Richard Hutton, Sir
John Ramsden, and Sir George Wentworth. These
gentlemen volunteers had amongst them many great
and honourable names, such as the Daveys of Lincolnshire,
lords of thirty-three baronies in that county; Sir
Edward Radcliffe, of Threshfield, in Craven; Colonel
Portington, of Barnby Dun, who suffered great things
for the royal cause; Captain Vavasour, of Haslewood,
a man of old and noble family, and an adherent of the
ancient religion, being a Catholic, as were also several
of the gentlemen volunteers, such as the Crofts, the
Sayles, the Hammertons, the Stapletons, the Annes of
Burghwallis, the Pearrys, the Easts, the Emsons, and
many others; Sir John Ramsden of Byram, Lieutenant
Saville, Sir Richard Hutton, High Sheriff of Yorkshire,
whom the King was used to call the honest judge, with
many another gallant gentleman who was more minded
to serve the monarchy than the democracy. All these
helped to make the ancient Castle a stronghold for the
King, and did there practise their companies in the art
of war, so that there was good prospect of their being
able to hold out in the event of the Parliamentary troops
being led against them.</p>

<p>Now, for some time after that news came to us but
very rarely, and was not stirring or eventful when it
did come, so that our lives went on in much the old
way. I went about my farm and did my work, riding
into market every Saturday, and there transacting my
business and hearing whatever gossip was afloat. There
might have been no disturbance in the land, so smoothly
did things go with us at Dale’s Field. To me, indeed,
it was a pleasant time, for the presence of Rose Lisle
seemed to cast a new light over the old house. She
had made herself one of us already, looking up to my
mother as if she were her own daughter, and busying
herself about the household duties just as Lucy did.
And so much did she win my mother’s heart that I
believe she began to love Rose as a daughter, at which
I was well pleased, being strangely rejoiced to see it.</p>

<p>Looking back upon that time, I cannot decide in my
own mind when it was that I first began to love Rose
Lisle. Nay, I do not think that there ever was a time
when I did not love her, from the first moment in which
I set eyes on her, coming singing along the path in the
woods, for I thought of her from that day constantly,
boy as I was. And yet when I met her again and found
her grown a woman, and more beautiful than any woman
I have even seen, I was conscious of a new feeling and
a new hope springing up in my heart, so that I came to
look upon her as the one desire of my life. To me she
was always the same, a maiden to be loved and honoured
and won if my unworthiness could win her. Yet there
was nothing fiery or impatient about my love for her,
for it was enough for me that I could see her and enjoy
her presence. And I knew not whether in those days
she saw that I loved her, as indeed I did.</p>

<p>But there were others who saw it, and of these none
were quicker in seeing it than Jacob Trusty, whose old
eyes, I think, could see through a millstone in anything
that concerned me. I had often noticed him watching
Rose and myself narrowly as we walked of an evening
in the garden or orchard, and many a time I had come
across him and Rose talking together on such matters as
the rearing of poultry and feeding of calves and other
similar subjects on which Jacob’s heart delighted. But
for a long time he said nothing to me, though I could
see that he was thinking a good deal, for he was one of
those people who do not deliver their minds in a hurry,
and this quality seemed to deepen in him as his years
increased. However, he was at last minded to address
me on the matter, which he did one day as we stood in
the cow-house, where we had been considering the
advisability of feeding the roan cow for market.</p>

<p>“Master Tuckett,” said Jacob, “seems to come courting
very strong. A persevering young man as ever I
saw.”</p>

<p>This was true. I suppose nobody was ever more
slavishly in love than Ben was with my sister Lucy.</p>

<p>“The doorstep,” continued Jacob, “never cools of him.
However, ’tis the way of the world. So long as there
are lasses there will be lads to run after them. In going
through the world, William, you will never see aught
plainer than that. Who-ho! Stand over, lass.”</p>

<p>This last remark was addressed to the roan cow, whose
stall Jacob was bedding down with straw. He poked
and prodded the straw about her feet before he resumed
his remarks.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis as natural to fall in love,” said Jacob, “as it is
for schoolboys to fight. The most natural thing in the
world it is. For in going through the world, William,
what does a man see? He sees the birds a-mating and
a-building their nests everywhere, and the doves making
love after their fashion in every coppice. Wherefore,
I say, it is a very natural thing that young men and
women should pair off.”</p>

<p>“But, Jacob, “I said, “you never paired off with anybody,
because you have never been married. Come,
now, why didn’t you practise what you preach?”</p>

<p>“Why, certainly,” he said, “that’s true, but there’s a
many people very good at preaching who are very poor
at practising, William. True it is I have never been
married.”</p>

<p>“Nor in love, Jacob?”</p>

<p>“Why,” he said, “as to that, there was a young woman
in Badsworth parish that I did think of at odd times.
A young widow woman she was, and as plump as a
partridge. Ah! I once walked a matter of seven miles
to see her. A fine figure of a woman.”</p>

<p>“And it never came to anything, Jacob?”</p>

<p>“No-o,” said Jacob slowly, “no-o. I never could quite
give my mind to wedlock, though admiring it in others.
It seemed beautiful at a distance, but I don’t know how
it might be nearer at hand.”</p>

<p>“Oh, Jacob, and that is you who talk so finely about
birds and doves and such like.”</p>

<p>“Ay, marry,” he said, with a twinkle of his gray eyes,
“and why not? I am well pleased to see Master Tuckett
come a-courting of our Lucy, and between thee and me
and the post, William, I should like to see thee making
towards a gold ring thyself. What, man, didst ever see
a properer maiden than yond? I lay not.”</p>

<p>He pointed across the fold to the orchard, where Rose
Lisle, fair as a dream of May, was gathering the ripe
fruit into a basket and singing some old ditty softly to
herself. I turned and watched her in silence.</p>

<p>“If I were thou, William,” said old Jacob, “I should
thank God three times a day for such a wife as yond.
Never in all this world wilt thou find so fair a maiden,
nor so good. Let her not slip from thee. I speak,
being old and anxious for thy welfare, having loved thee
from thy birth upwards. I should like to see thy boy
sitting on my knees before I go, William, even as thou
didst sit there many years ago.”</p>

<p>Andhaving said that he immediately began to make a
noise and bustle amongst the cows, shaking up the straw
in their stalls and causing them to tug so at their chains
that I escaped from the racket and joined Rose Lisle in
the apple orchard, being half inclined to tell her there
and then of my love for her; yet I refrained, for I was
not minded to be too hasty, although I knew right well
that I loved her as truly as if I had known her for
twenty years.</p>

<p>During the first autumn weeks in that year we had
little news of Philip Lisle and Jack Drumbleforth. They
had sent us word soon after their departure of their safe
arrival at Nottingham, where the King was gathering
an army about him, but after that there came a long
period during which we had no tidings whatever. We
often made inquiry of the people travelling along the
road, but received nothing but vague and indefinite
tidings of the course of events. Some said that the
King had gathered a great army about him; others
reported that his Majesty had but a scanty following.
Towards the end of September came news of a fight at
Powick Bridge, in which the Royalist troops had been
successful, and this naturally gave a feeling of
encouragement to those who like ourselves were loyal to the
monarchy. Then came another period of silence; and
then, a month later, we began to hear rumours of a
great fight at Edgehill, on the borders of Warwick and
Oxford, at which, said our informants, many men on both
sides had been slain and wounded. We were somewhat
anxious at this, being in ignorance as to the safety
of our own friends, and we made many inquiries of
travellers coming from the south, hearing nothing,
however, till well into November, when a horseman, covered
with mire and mud, rode up to our door, and, asking
for Master Dale, delivered into my hands a thick packet
directed to me in Jack Drumbleforth’s writing.</p>

<h2>XVIII</h2>

<h3>OF JACK’S LETTERS FROM THE SEAT OF WAR</h3>

<p>Now, as good fortune would have it, Parson Drumbleforth
happened to be in our house at the very moment of the
arrival of Jack’s letter, and knowing that the latter
would not fail to send news to his father, I asked the
messenger if he had no communication for the Vicar of
Darrington.</p>

<p>“Yea, troth have I,” he answered, touching his pouch
significantly, and here it is in my satchel. God send
it be not out of my track, for me and my horse are tired
enow, having ridden I know not how many miles this
day, and being bound for the Castle at Pontefract with
despatches for Colonel Lowther.”</p>

<p>“It is not out of your track, friend,” I said; “but here
is the Vicar himself, and you can do your errand without
further hindrance. And if your despatches are not too
pressing, and if you will please to dismount, we will
entertain both your horse and yourself with food and
rest, which will do neither any harm, judging from your
appearance.”</p>

<p>“You speak truly, master,” said the man, getting
slowly down from his saddle as if he were stiff with long
riding. “You speak truly indeed. Beshrew me if I
have drawn rein since I passed Conisbrough Castle, as
you may believe by looking at my beast. As for the
despatches, I care not about immediate deliverance of
them, so long as they fall not into the enemy’s hands.”</p>

<p>“We are for the King here,” I said, and led him into
the kitchen, whither he followed me with great readiness,
“and your despatches will be safe enough, for there
has been no fighting in this quarter as yet, whatever
there may be to come.”</p>

<p>“You are well off,” said he, sinking down like a tired
man upon the long settle. “By the great Turk! but we
had a fair brush of it at Edgehill yonder. A plague take
this war, say I! If it were with one’s natural enemies,
Spaniard or Turk, well and good, but as it is⁠—”</p>

<p>“Then Master Drumbleforth has been at Edgehill?” I said.
“Is he well, and is Master Lisle with him?”</p>

<p>“They are both thereabouts,” he answered, “or maybe
at this present they are on the road towards London,
for his Majesty is minded to spend Christmas at
Whitehall, and is pushing on thither.”</p>

<p>“Then the King hath won the fight at Edgehill?”</p>

<p>“Why that, master, is more than I can say. Myself,
I should say ’twas a drawn game. However, Essex and
his men have retreated southwards, and the royal forces
are after them.”</p>

<p>By that time the maids had brought food and drink,
and placed them before the messenger; so bidding him
refresh himself and spare not, I carried the letters into
my mother’s parlour, where she and Parson Drumbleforth
and the two girls were seated conversing in the
firelight. For it was now growing dark and cold o’
nights, and we were always glad to get the curtain drawn
and the candles lighted, so that we might hear the wind
and rain outside, and feel comfortable that we were
safely housed.</p>

<p>“News from the wars!” I cried, holding up the two
letters. “A messenger carrying despatches for Colonel
Lowther hath brought them with him. Here is one for
you, sir, from Jack, and another for me. Mistress Rose,
there is naught from your father, but he is well, so the
messenger says, and maybe he has enclosed somewhat in
Jack’s letter.”</p>

<p>So I whipped out my knife, and cut away the cover,
but there was no letter for Rose lying therein.</p>

<p>“He hath been too busy to write,” she said, smiling,
“but he will have sent some message by Master
Drumbleforth’s letter. So long as he is well I care not.”</p>

<p>Now, the Vicar had eagerly opened his own epistle,
and was peering at it through his glasses, while my
mother and Lucy stood eagerly by to hear the news.</p>

<p>“Are they well, sir?” inquired my mother. “Pray
God they both be in good health, so far away from home
and friends as they are. ’Tis poor work to be sick in a
strange country.”</p>

<p>“Why,” said Parson Drumbleforth, they seem to be
well enough, mistress, judging from the manner in which
my son writes to me. Nevertheless, his epistle is a
somewhat short one, and dealeth in little news. But if ye
will give ear I will read it to you, so that we may all
share in it.”</p>

<p>So when he had cleared his voice, he read as follows:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>“At the King’s Camp near Edgehill,<br>“October 26, 1642.</p>

<p>“To the Rev. Mr. Drumbleforth, M.A., Vicar of Darrington
in the County of Yorkshire. These:</p>

<p>“Honoured Father, — There being a messenger
about to carry despatches from our camp here unto
Colonel Lowther at Pontefract Castle, I am minded to
write these to your Reverence, in the hope that they
may find you in as good health as I now enjoy, for
which I thank God heartily. I would have you know
that there hath been a great fight here at Edgehill, in
which both Master Lisle and myself figured without hurt
to ourselves, save that Master Lisle hath gotten a cut
across the fingers of his right hand which doth prevent
him at present from holding a pen. For this reason I
am about writing a long letter to Will Dale, so that he
may give news to Mistress Rose, and as I am no hand at
much writing of epistles, I will beg you, honoured sir,
to step along the highway to Dale’s Field and learn the
news there. Only I will here tell you that I am now in
very good health, and have as yet come in no great need
of anything, though, indeed, my shirts are becoming
ragged, and my half-hose are well-nigh worn through.
Yea, indeed, you might say to Mistress Deborah that if
she hath any linen or other body-clothes of mine stored
away, she would do well to pack it up, and send it to me
by the bearer of this, who will return hither shortly.
For I wish not to be reduced to the condition of some
who, having but one shirt, are forced to go without while
what they have is washed—”</p>

</blockquote>

<p>“Poor things, poor things!” said my mother. “Alas!
the war is a terrible matter. What would their mothers
say if they could see them in such a plight?”</p>

<p>“I will resume,” said the Vicar.</p>

<blockquote>

<p>“As to food, honoured sir, we have so far done fairly
well, and I have grown no thinner. Likewise the life so
far hath suited my mind very well, though I know not
how it may be when the winter sets in. However, we
have beaten back the enemy, and are now following him
towards London, where the King means to spend Christmas.
And so, sir, assuring you that I am well in body
and mind, and do strive to fulfil all my duties as a
Christian man, I will refer you to Will Dale for further
news. Only I will beg you to believe that I am your
very dutiful and loving son,</p>
<p>“John Drumbleforth.”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>“ ’Tis a very right and proper letter,” said the Vicar,
folding up the sheet with much pride, “and doth the lad
great credit. I am rejoiced to think that in the midst
of battles and conflicts he doeth his duty as a Christian
man should. Yea, indeed, this letter hath much refreshed
me. But now, William, let us have thy news, which I
doubt not will contain a deal of war and bloodshed, and
such like. Open thy paper, man, and read.”</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” said I, “there are the people without who
have heard that news has come, and they are anxious to
hear it. What do you say, mother, if we allow them to
come inside here and listen to Jack’s letter being read?”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a good thought,” said Parson Drumbleforth. “Yea,
mistress, let us have them all inside.”</p>

<p>So my mother called them all to come, and presently
they appeared—Jacob Trusty, and the maids, and
Timothy Grass, and the ploughboys—and stood in a
group at the door, ready to listen. Only the messenger
stayed by himself in the kitchen, eating and drinking at
his ease, with the firelight shining on his rough and
weather-beaten countenance.</p>

<p>“Friends,” said I, when they had all assembled, “here
is a letter which hath come from the wars, from Mr. John
Drumbleforth. We thought you would like to hear
what news he sends, so you shall hear it read.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said Parson Drumbleforth. Read on, Will.”</p>

<p>But I did not think of reading it myself, Jack’s writing
being somewhat clerkly, and not like print. So I handed
it over to Rose.</p>

<p>“Mistress Rose,” I said, “you are a greater scholar
than I, and have a clear voice. Will you read us Jack’s
letter?”</p>

<p>So she consented, standing up by the light, and looking
mighty pretty as she stood there. And this is what
she read to us:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>“At the Camp beyond Edgehill,<br>“October 26, 1642.</p>
<p>“To Mr. William Dale, at his farm of Dale’s Field
along the Great North Road, near Pontefract, in
Yorkshire. These:</p>
<p>“Dear Will,—There has been a great battle fought
at Edgehill here, and Master Lisle has had a cut across
the fingers of his right hand, so that he is unable to
write to Mistress Rose himself. However, you will tell
her that he is quite well and in good health otherwise,
and sendeth his dearest love and blessing to her, hoping
that she too is well and that he may see her again erelong.
Likewise that he will write unto her with his own
hand so soon as he can use it once more, which will not
be long, the wound being but insignificant—”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>“Thank the Lord for that!” said Jacob Trusty. “For
the fingers are but tender things when all is said and
done.”</p>

<blockquote>

<p>“We came on here, Will, from joining the King’s
forces near Nottingham, and we have had one other
brush with the enemy before this fight at Edgehill,
namely, at Powick Bridge, where we did vanquish the
Parliamentarians with very great ease. This affair at
Edgehill, however, was a matter of different complexion,
and showed me what war is really like when it comes
to it. For here was Essex with a considerable force
of men, and some of them exceedingly well trained and
officered, so that we knew there was some stiff and
bloody work before us ere ever we drew sword. And
now that it is over I cannot say that we have gained any
decided advantage, for though the Parliamentarians are
retreating before us, it is very slowly, and seems to
savour more of caution than fear. However, the advantage,
if any there be, is with us, for which we are thankful.</p>
<p>“I wish, Will, that you could have been side by side
with me in this fight, for it was indeed hot work, and
gave me many new feelings. I cannot describe to you
how the bullets whistled past our ears, or how the
cannon thundered, nor how the charges of cavalry shook
the ground. Neither have I clerkship enough to tell
you how it looked when dead and dying men strewed the
ground in all directions. As for myself, there was at
first a strange sensation came over me, but then I got
hot and earnest, and thought of nothing but winning the
day. I wish, too, that you had seen the charge of
Prince Rupert and his cavalry, which swept the
Parliamentarians away like chaff before the wind, for it
was the finest sight ever I saw. Nevertheless, Will,
many old campaigners do seem to think that this
same Prince Rupert hath somewhat too much of
haste about him for a great commander. Certain
it is that he is headstrong and impetuous, and doeth
everything as if he were a whirlwind rushing over
the earth.</p>
<p>“We have heard considerable news of what is going on
during these last few weeks, for there are couriers and
messengers going and coming continually with tidings
from all parts. We understand that there is hardly a
town or village where they are not making preparations
for war on one side or the other. As to how the land
will be divided, they say that the nobility, gentry, and
common people will be for the King, while the trading
classes and the yeomen of the south and west are for the
Parliament. But the common people of London are not
for the King, for we have heard that no less than four
thousand of them enlisted on the Parliamentary side in
one day. Hampden has been down in Buckinghamshire
and has there raised a band of two thousand men, whom
he hath dressed in green coats, so that they make a
brave show. We hear, too, that one Cromwell, a
member of Parliament, is raising a band of men in the
fen country, and is disciplining them in rare fashion,
having boasted that with a thousand men of his own
stamp he will put the King’s forces to confusion. And
certain it is, Will, that some of these Parliamentarians
are terribly in earnest over this matter, and are willing
to back up their arguments by hard knocks.</p>
<p>“The King hath gotten himself a good army together,
and at present his friends seem assured of victory, yet
his Majesty hath not a happy look on his countenance,
which is always sad and thoughtful. I hear that the
Queen hath gone abroad to raise money for the war, and
hath taken with her the Crown jewels and ornaments
wherewith to further that object. How our army will
fare about supplies I know not at present, but up to this
time we have had no cause of complaint, and so long as
we continue to be successful I think the men will live
in good spirits. Moreover, we hope shortly to be in
London, but there will be some sharp brushes ere we get
there, for the trained bands will certainly oppose our
progress, and they are commanded by General Skippon,
who, I understand, hath had long experience in the
German wars. Doubt not, however, that we shall give
a good account of ourselves, for we are not lightly to
be put down by these Roundhead knaves. Yet, indeed,
Will, this war is a terrible matter, for there are families
divided against each other, and it is easily done for
father to kill son or son to kill father—”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>“Alas!” said my mother; “he is right—a terrible
matter it is indeed; would it were well over!”</p>

<blockquote>

<p>“And now I have no more news for thee at present,
old Will, save that Master Lisle is commander of a
company of volunteers, and I am one of his men and
likely to be promoted, being, so they say, of good stuff
for a soldier. So when I come homewards again I may
perhaps come as captain or colonel. Glad indeed I shall
be to see ye all again, for in all my wanderings thus far
I have seen naught that I liked so well as our own
village, with its gray church tower and comfortable
alehouse, nor have I met any face that I welcomed as I
would welcome one of our own home faces. So thou
wilt remember me to everybody—to thy mother and
sister and to Mistress Rose and to Jacob; and thou wilt
tell Jacob that I have remembered his many admonitions
and found them useful; and thou mayest tell Timothy
that the horses in these parts are not like ours, and beg
thy mother to make the autumn ale extra strong this
year, for indeed I am looking forward to it. And now I
will say farewell to all of you until another time, when
thou shalt hear more, God willing, from thy old friend,</p>
<p>“JOHN DRUMBLEFORTH.”</p>
</blockquote>

<p>So the letter was read, and we were all glad to hear
that our two adventurers were so far well and prosperous.
And the servants having gone out, much pleased with
what they had heard, I followed them to speed forward
the messenger with his despatches for Colonel Lowther,
bidding him call upon us the next day as he returned
southwards, so that we might give him letters for our
friends. And after he had gone we sat down with pens
and papers and wrote news to them, assuring them of
our joy that so far they had been spared amidst all their
dangers.</p>

<h2>XIX</h2>

<h3>OF THE REMARKABLE CONDUCT OF DENNIS WATSON</h3>

<p>During the next few months we heard little news of
Philip Lisle and Jack Drumbleforth, for the war made
but small progress, the rival armies being for the most
part in safe quarters for the winter. Now and then,
indeed, we had letters from both our adventurers, but
they had little to tell us, nor could they give us any
information as to what time we might expect to see them
again. So matters went on during that winter, and
there were many who prophesied that before spring the
sad difference ’twixt King and Parliament would be
adjusted, and the nation restored to peace and
tranquillity. But there were others, men of keener sight
and perception, who knew that the unhappy quarrel now
in existence would only be terminated by the complete
overthrow of one side or the other. Amongst these
men, who proved the true prophets in the end, there
were none more sagacious than Oliver Cromwell, the
man of whom Jack Drumbleforth had spoken in his
letter, and who afterwards came to enjoy great power,
so that he ruled England for many years with sterner
hand than any king had ever exercised. This Cromwell
was a yeoman of Huntingdon, a man of the most
surprising powers, so that those who favoured his views
looked upon him as nearly divine, and obeyed him as
surely no king was ever obeyed. As for his generalship,
none will dispute that he was the central figure of this
sad war, for he and his Ironsides turned the fortunes of
the fight many a time when things were going against
the Parliamentarians. Now, during that winter this
Cromwell was training his men with a skill and conviction
which speedily made his troop unrivalled for
bravery and prowess in the field. Such a general, I
suppose, never lived, for he refused to have men under
him who fought not from conviction, so that his regiment
became a body of troopers who struck each blow
under the firm belief that their strength was increased
by the powers of Heaven. Men who fought for fighting’s
sake, old soldiers who fought because to fight was their
profession, he would have none of; his Ironsides were
men like himself, animated with the sense of a mission
from on high. How these men did succeed in the Civil
War all England knows at this present time. And
though I could never side with them, being by conviction
a Royalist, and believing that popular government is
much more tyrannical than ever monarchical has been
or can be, I did yet see enough of them to know that
they were true Englishmen, and impelled to what they
did by a sense of real patriotism.</p>

<p>Now, during that winter I had other matters to think
of than the war, for I was much exercised in my mind
over the peculiar conduct of Dennis Watson. I have
said little of Dennis and his father lately, for indeed
they have not come within my history, I having seen
little of them since my father’s death. True, I
constantly saw them at the markets, never holding speech
with them nor being in their company, for I regarded
them both with exceeding bitter feelings, being convinced
that Rupert Watson was the murderer of my dear father,
and not liking what I knew of Dennis. Many an hour
did I pass in thinking over the events of that fatal night
when my father was shot down at my side, and at such
times my fingers itched to grasp his assassin’s throat
and crush the breath out of him. But with all my
thinking I could never get any nearer the heart of the
matter, and so was fain to let it rest as it did. And yet
I had no doubt that it was Rupert Watson who committed
that foul deed, and I have often stood in Pontefract
Market-place watching his dark face and longing
that I could fasten the full guilt upon him and bring
him to task for his crime.</p>

<p>By this time Dennis Watson was grown up to manhood and
took his full share in the affairs of his father’s
business. He was a tall, fine-looking man, not by three
inches as tall as myself, but exceedingly well
proportioned and handsome in countenance, so that the maidens
in that neighbourhood were used to say he was the
best-looking fellow in the county. Yet for all his good looks
there was something about his face, whether in eyes or
mouth I cannot say, which made me feel that I could
never have trusted or liked him, even if he had not been
a Watson and therefore my rightful enemy. Some
people may say that I had a prejudice against him, and
that my dislike to him arose therefrom; but, as events
proved, I was right in what I thought. For he was not
only false and treacherous, but cruel and revengeful, as
you will see in the course of this history. Yea, I think
that if his father were possessed of bad qualities, they
were increased and multiplied in Dennis.</p>

<p>It was drawing near to the end of winter, when I had
occasion one Saturday to go to Doncaster market,
instead of proceeding, as was my wont, to the market at
Pontefract, and in consequence of this it was somewhat
late in the evening when I reached home again, being
further delayed by a heavy storm of snow, which came
upon me as I rode between Barnsdale and Wentbridge.
Now, when I came into the kitchen I found the two
girls, Lucy and Rose, busied in drying many garments
of female attire at a great fire, as if they had been out
in the storm, like myself, and had got wet through,
which I was not, being protected by my great cloak that
has kept me dry and warm in all sorts of weather for
half a century. So when I came to question them, it
appeared that they had desired to go into Pontefract
market that afternoon and had walked thither by way of
Darrington. And there, as girls will, they had tarried
so long looking at the goods exposed for sale in the
mercers’ shops, that the darkness came upon them ere
they were out of the town, and, to make matters worse,
the snowstorm overtook them as they came over Swanhill.</p>

<p>“But there,” said Rose, who had told me all this news,
“a good Samaritan was riding by in his light cart, and
seeing our plight, he offered us a lift and brought us
home to the very orchard gate, which was a kind thing
to do, for we had been wet through else.”</p>

<p>“And who was your cavalier?” I asked.</p>

<p>“Nay,” she answered, “I know him not, but so far as
one could see he was a handsome young man, and very
well spoken, too, and did for us all that he could.”</p>

<p>“Did you know him, Lucy?” I inquired, turning to my
sister, who was busied with some article of finery at the
fire.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Lucy, with something of reluctance I
thought. “Yes, I knew him, Will, but I fear you will be
angry if I tell you his name. For it was Dennis Watson,
brother, who gave us a ride home.”</p>

<p>“Dennis Watson! “</p>

<p>“You need not look so much astonished,” said Lucy,
who was half ready to weep. “If you had seen what a
plight we were in you would have excused us.”</p>

<p>“Why,” said Rose, “for what are we to be excused,
pray? Is there any harm, Master Will, in two young
women accepting such timely help?”</p>

<p>“You do not understand,” I said. “This Watson is
our deadly enemy, and Lucy knows that she should never
have so much as speech with him. For shame, Lucy!
You should have walked through a wilderness of snow
rather than accepted help from him.”</p>

<p>Now, I spoke so sharply that poor Lucy, who was very
tender-hearted, and had been completely spoiled for
aught but soft speeches by that simpleton, Ben Tuckett,
began to shed tears and otherwise exhibit much emotion.
Of which conduct I took no need, continuing to upbraid
her sharply, until I saw Mistress Rose’s cheeks grow red
and her eyes bright, and presently she turned upon me
very fiercely and looked at me so indignantly that I
became silent.</p>

<p>“Go your ways, Master Dale,” she said. “You are too
bad and too cruel, and you ought to be ashamed of
yourself for speaking to poor Lucy in this unmanly fashion.
A pretty thing indeed that we may not accept a little
gallantry without being spoken to in this fashion!”</p>

<p>“Indeed, Mistress Rose,” I said, “I am not addressing
myself to you, but to Lucy there, who knows—”</p>

<p>“Lucy knows that if we had not accepted Master
Watson’s kindness we should have caught our deaths of
cold,” she answered; “but that perhaps would have suited
you better, so that your naughty pride should not be
injured. For shame, Master Dale! And now go away
and let me comfort Lucy. You should have Master
Drumbleforth to lecture you for your unkindness to your
sister.”</p>

<p>And therewith she made up to Lucy and put her arms
round her, turning her own pretty face towards me with</p>

<p>such a look of injury that I was completely subdued, and
stumbled out of the kitchen, wondering how it is that a
woman can beat a man nine times out of ten. For there
was not a man in all Yorkshire could have scolded me
with impunity, and yet I dared not say a word to Mistress
Rose Lisle. So away I went to my chamber to change
my own damp garments, and returning after a little time
found Rose alone in the great kitchen, Lucy having gone
to assist my mother in some household duty. Now, they
had left to Rose the task of giving me my supper, so
there she was ready to wait upon me, which she did very
dutifully. Perhaps I looked somewhat ashamed of myself
for my recent conduct (though indeed, upon reflection, I
know not what there was to be ashamed of), and Rose,
seeing it, thought to give me some comfort, for presently,
while I was eating and drinking, and she sitting near
busied with some woman’s work of sewing or shaping,
she gave me a timid glance and said that she feared she
had spoken too sharply but a little while ago, and begged
my pardon for doing so.</p>

<p>“Though indeed, Will,” she continued, “you were too
hard upon poor Lucy, who meant no ill. Do you really
think she did wrong to accept Master Watson’s help?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” I said shortly, meaning not to be forced from
my position on any account. “Yes, because she knew
that the man is our enemy.”</p>

<p>“To have heard him speak,” she said, “I should not
have thought him to be anyone’s enemy.”</p>

<p>“I know not how he speaks,” I answered. “Rough-spoken or
soft-spoken, our enemy he is.”</p>

<p>“But why should you be enemies?” she asked. “Surely
it is best to be at peace with all, is it not?”</p>

<p>“I cannot answer that, Mistress Rose. I suppose
Parson Drumbleforth would say that it is, and therefore
I ought to say so too; but, you see, the Dales and
Watsons have always been at enmity, and always
will be.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” she said, “why should they? Must strife go
on for ever? Why do you not heal your differences and
be at peace?”</p>

<p>“Mistress Rose,” I said, “did you never hear tell of my
father’s foul murder? Slain he was, as cruelly as ever
man was slain-shot down on the high-road as if he had
been a dog.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” she said, “I have heard of it.”</p>

<p>“And did you not know that we believe Rupert
Watson, the father of this. Dennis, to have been the
murderer? Yea, that we do! And now you know why
these Watsons are our enemies, and why we must have
neither part nor lot with them.”</p>

<p>She was silent for a little time after that, and sat
diligently plying her needle.</p>

<p>“But, Master Dale,” she said after a time, “do you
really think that this Master Rupert Watson killed your
father? Can any man be so cruel as to commit such a
deed? Might it not have been the work of some robber
who was alarmed at the coming of others, and rode away
after firing upon your poor father? It seems so hard to
think that any man could foully slay another like that.”</p>

<p>“It may seem so to one like yourself,” I said; “but so
far as I have seen, a man will do anything for revenge.
And Rupert Watson had need of revenge.”</p>

<p>“But if he did it,” she said, “his son had naught to do
with the wickedness. And it is so much better to be at
peace with one’s neighbours that it would seem more
kind not to visit the father’s faults on the son. It is not
right, is it, to blame one for what another has done, nor
to think the son is bad because the father was?”</p>

<p>“I know not whether it be right or wrong, Mistress
Rose,” I answered; “but this I do know, that Dennis
Watson comes of a bad stock and is our enemy, and will
always be.”</p>

<p>So after that she said no more, only she seemed to
think that I was one of an unforgiving temper. But I
could not find it in my heart to think well of any
Watson.</p>

<p>Now, the next morning was fine and frosty, and in
accordance with our usual custom we walked along the
high-road to the morning service at Darrington church.
And we had not long been seated in the church when I
caught sight of Dennis Watson, who occupied a seat near
our own, and who was looking boldly upon Rose. Thereat
a thought struck me which sent me first hot and then
cold, and made my blood tingle in my veins. What if
this ancient enemy of mine had seen Rose Lisle only
to covet her and wish to win her for himself? Indeed,
there was no reason why he should not fall in love with
Rose Lisle if his heart inclined that way. But I felt that
if such a thing should ever come to pass as that he should
win her, then— But there I thought no more of it,
only I made a great vow that Rose should be mine and
mine only, whatever might come.</p>

<p>Dennis Watson, however, had evidently some project
in his mind, for no sooner was the last “Amen” said
than he hurried out of church and stood waiting us when
we came through the porch, where he stood bowing and
scraping to the two girls, who were going out first. He
was dressed very fine, and his grand clothes looked gay
and modish in comparison with my own sober garments.
When I came up with them, he was already addressing
the girls, Rose accepting his remarks with a polite air, but
Lucy shrinking back as if frightened, as indeed she was,
knowing that I was behind her.</p>

<p>“I was but too glad to be able to do a little service to
two ladies,” Dennis was saying as I strode up behind.
“Mistress Lucy, I trust, was–”</p>

<p>But there I spoke myself.</p>

<p>“Mistress Lucy Dale, sir, is grateful for the service you
did her, as I expect she told you at the time, so that I
know no need for more to be said.”</p>

<p>And with that I drew Lucy’s arm within my own and
turned away. But I saw the same dark flush rise to
Dennis Watson’s face and the same look come into his
eyes which I remembered of old when we were schoolboys
together.</p>

<p>“As you please, Master Dale,” said he. “You seem
inclined for enmity rather than friendship.”</p>

<p>“Between you and me, I answered, “there can be no
friendship, Master Dennis Watson. There is blood
between us.”</p>

<p>Now, I would not have said that upon reflection, but it
had slipped my lips ere I was aware. His face went pale
and he glared at me angrily.</p>

<p>“So you accuse us of murder, do you?” he whispered,
walking close to my side. “There shall be more blood
between us if you like. Meet me in Went Woods tomorrow
at sunrise and let us settle our difference,
Master Dale. The sooner the better, to my mind.”</p>

<p>“As you will,” I said, and walked onward. He had
spoken in a low voice and the girls had not heard him.
But I had heard, and comprehended, and now there I
was face to face with the ancient quarrel, which it
seemed that nothing could stamp out.</p>

<h2>XX</h2>

<h3>OF THE MEETING IN THE WOODS</h3>

<p>I suppose that I was very quiet and reflective during
that walk home from church, for more than once
Mistress Rose Lisle rallied me on my silence. And
indeed I had cause for reflection, for I knew that what
had passed between me and Dennis Watson meant
serious business. I was not the man to draw back when
he spoke of meeting to settle our difference, for I had no
fear either of him or of death. But I do not think any
man, however brave he may be, can choose but think
seriously when he is about to fight a duel. There he is
with a very great chance of being shot, and more chance,
I suppose, than in a pitched battle. Now, if I were to be
shot and killed it would be a very unpleasant thing in
more senses than one. For the women would be left
defenceless and the farm would be without a master, and
everything would be at sixes and sevens, to say nothing
of the grief that would result. However, what must be
must be, and it was perhaps as well that the old quarrel
had broken out again sooner than later. I knew right
well that Dennis Watson and myself could never be
other than enemies, and when there is a feeling like that
betwixt two men, bloodshed is certain to result. So
when I had come to that conclusion, I strove to put the
matter from me and to talk and think of other things.
But in spite of my endeavours I could not quite keep the
matter out of my mind, and presently I found myself
wishing that Jack Drumbleforth were at home so that
I could ask his advice. For Jack was skilled in the
conduct of all these sort of matters and would have been
sure to give me wise counsel.</p>

<p>I was not, however, to go quite without an adviser, for
when we reached home we found Ben Tuckett seated
in the parlour, he having walked over the hill from
Pontefract to pay his usual Sunday visit to Lucy. I
was very glad to see honest Ben, and determined to
confide in him. Yet I would much rather have seen
Jack’s face, for Ben, though a true friend and a trusty,
was very fond of preserving his own skin and other
people’s too, and hated the sight of pistol or sword.
Nevertheless, I determined to press him into service on
this occasion.</p>

<p>After dinner I got Ben out of the house on pretence of
wishing to show him a new cow which I had purchased
the previous day at Doncaster. Ben was somewhat slow
in responding to my invitation, for it was a bitter cold
day outside, and the fire in my mother’s parlour looked
very inviting. Moreover, there were some fine apples
and walnuts on the table, and Lucy had picked out a
remarkably large pear for Ben to try his teeth on, so
that he gazed longingly around him as I led him forth,
and shivered when we turned into the fold.</p>

<p>“Come, Ben, “I said, “you can surely stand ten
minutes of cold weather. You did not notice the cold, I
warrant, as you came along this morning!”</p>

<p>“No,” said he; “for then, Will, I was coming into
Paradise, but now I am going away from it. Did you
never notice that the schoolboy goes slowly to school and
quickly from it? Likewise that a horse comes home
from market faster than it goes? Show me this
wonderful cow, Will, and let us go back to the fire and
the girls.”</p>

<p>“Never mind the cow,” I said, “it is not worth seeing.
Come in here, Ben, into the granary. It is warm
enough here for anything. You see, I have something
to tell you and could not tell it before the women.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” said he, “now I see what you would have.
Well, out with it, Will, for your granary is, after all, but
a draughty place.”</p>

<p>“Ben,” I said, “what would you say if I told you Iwas
going to fight a duel?”</p>

<p>“Why, I should say more fool you,” answered Ben.</p>

<p>“That is just what I thought. Well, I am going to
fight a duel.”</p>

<p>“Then I cannot say anything less, Will. A duel!
Well, I had a better opinion of you than that.”</p>

<p>“Do you think I want to fight, man? Not I, indeed;
but there are times when a man is forced to fight.”</p>

<p>“I do not believe it,” said he. “For, look you, Will, if
a man wanted to fight me, I should tell him that I
valued my life too dearly to expose it in that mad
fashion. For life and liberty I would fight hard enow,
but I would not put myself within twelve yards of
another man’s pistol for him to shoot at in cold blood.
That I call rank folly.”</p>

<p>“Well, so it may be, Ben, but you would not have me
a coward?”</p>

<p>“I know thee, Will, for as brave a lad as ever stepped,
but thou wouldst not wax braver in my estimation by
fighting a hundred duels.”</p>

<p>“This one, however, I must fight, Ben. There is no
question about it.”</p>

<p>“And with what other fool art thou going to fight, Will?”</p>

<p>“With Dennis Watson.”</p>

<p>Ben nodded his head significantly.</p>

<p>“Oh,” said he, “so that old sore is reopened, is it?
The sleeping dogs will not lie, eh, Will?”</p>

<p>“They might have slept for ever if it had rested with
me, lad. And yet perhaps not. So far as I can see it
is impossible for us Dales and Watsons to be at aught
but enmity. Do you remember, Ben, that occasion
when Dennis and I fought behind the high wall in the
school-yard?”</p>

<p>“Yea, very well.”</p>

<p>“After I had fairly beaten him he came up to me and
told me that he hated me, and always should hate me,
and would cause me such trouble as would make me
wish that I had never been born. So that you see, Ben,
hatred like that is not like to die out.”</p>

<p>“Lads,” replied Ben, “will say aught. You should
have fallen upon him and given him another thrashing
for his naughty speech. But this present
disagreement—how came it about?”</p>

<p>“In this wise. It would seem that Dennis Watson
gave Lucy and Mistress Rose a lift from the market on
Saturday evening, and I was very grieved on account of
that, and did chide Lucy very sharply therefor, as
indeed I had a right to, for she is not thy wife yet,
Master Benjamin.”</p>

<p>“Go on, lad, go on. You were always masterful over
your womenkind.”</p>

<p>“Well, then, up springs Mistress Rose and flouts me
most unmercifully, so that I had never a word to say.
Yea, and looked at me, Ben, like a queen, so that I was
quite ashamed of myself, saying that I was unkind to
Lucy, and I know not what.”</p>

<p>“I am glad she hath such a spirit,” said Ben.</p>

<p>“Then this morning we went our ways to church, and
there was this Watson in fine clothes like a jay, and
when we came out he must be bowing and smiling to
the two maidens, until I cut it short by telling him that
I supposed my sister had already thanked him for his
service, and therefore there was no need to say more.
And at that he asks if I am for enmity or friendship, or
something to that effect, to which I replied that there
could never be aught but enmity between us. So then
he said that we had best settle our difference, and if I
would meet him in Went Wood to-morrow at sunrise,
we would settle it. And now, Ben, you know all about
it.”</p>

<p>“And a poor tale it is,” said Ben. “Why should you
reply that there must always be enmity between you?”</p>

<p>“Because his father murdered mine.”</p>

<p>“You think so, Will, but you do not know it. But
even if Rupert did slay your father, what had Dennis to
do with that?”</p>

<p>“He is a Watson.”</p>

<p>“Pooh! Am I to be blamed for all the vagaries that
Englishmen are now carrying on because I am of the
nation too? You are wrong, Will. ’Tis better to be at
peace than at enmity. Again, why did you chide Lucy?
Did Dennis do anything but a neighbourly act in giving
the maidens a lift? Why, ’twas snowing heavy that
night!”</p>

<p>“Lucy had no business to accept a favour from him,”
I said.</p>

<p>“Why, man, that is, to my mind, pure folly,” said
Ben. “However, we will not argue the point. Only, I
should not like to be hated by thee, Will, for thou art a
good hater. Well, can we go back to the fire now?”</p>

<p>“Not till I have told you what I want, Ben. You
must sleep here to-night and go with me in the morning.
You can do that at least for me, whether you think me
right or wrong.”</p>

<p>“Very well,” he said; and we went towards the house
again, but had not crossed the fold when I caught sight
of a lad standing at the gate with a paper in his hand.
He came over when he saw us and gave me the paper,
saying that Master Dennis Watson had sent it.</p>

<p>“Let us see what he has to say,” I said, turning away
with Ben and breaking the seal. “Listen, Ben.</p>

<p>“ ‘If William Dale is in the same mind that he was
in this morning, let him bring a friend with him to meet
Dennis Watson and his friend at the old sheep-fold in
Went Vale to-morrow morning at eight of the clock.’</p>

<p>“You see, Ben,” I said, “he is not minded to let things
rest. So now we must fight. Tell your master,” I
continued, turning to the boy, “that I will do what he
wishes.”</p>

<p>“God’s mercy!” said Ben, sighing deeply. “What a
state of things is this, where men grown do act like
children! Well, I will stand by thee to the end, Will,
and if you fall I will protect the women. Alas! you
had much better have gone to the wars, for there you
would have had some chance. And now let us inside to
the fire.”</p>

<p>During the rest of that day I was very restless and
unsettled in my demeanour, and I suppose that Rose
Lisle must have noticed it, for she kept looking at me
in a strange way. I could neither talk nor eat, but
wandered about from parlour to kitchen and in and out
of the house, so that my mother and Lucy both spoke of
my restlessness. And this was from no fear on my
part, but because I wanted the time to pass and the
affair to be over.</p>

<p>Late that night in my own chamber I cleaned my
pistol and made ready my powder and shot, placing
them in readiness for next morning. Somehow, the
sight and handling of them restored my calmness, and
presently I went to bed and slept as soundly as was
usual with me. And when I woke the gray light was
struggling through the window, whereupon I rose and
woke Ben, and finding that it was nearly time for our
meeting, we wrapped ourselves in our cloaks and set
forth across the snow to the woods. Now that the time
was at hand I felt as cool and unconcerned as ever I did
in all my life; but poor Ben, who neither liked the
business we were on nor leaving his warm bed for the
frosty morning, was woebegone and miserable, and did
shiver and tremble so that I had to give him my arm.</p>

<p>“Why, Ben,” said I, “this is the wrong way about. It
is you who ought to support me, not I you. You might
be going to be shot at yourself, man.”</p>

<p>“It is all very well to talk, Will, but I had rather be
shot at myself than see another man shot at. Fancy
the suspense while you take aim at one another! Whew!
it makes me run cold to think of it!”</p>

<p>“Then do not think of it. And, prithee, pluck up
some courage, for see, here they are, and I would not
that either of us should show any signs of fright.”</p>

<p>“Who is it that Dennis hath brought with him?” said
Ben, as we stepped into the enclosure. “Is it anyone
we know?”</p>

<p>“It is Tom Gascoyne,” I said. “Ah! that is another
man I like not. Birds of a feather are these two, Ben.
But see, here is Tom coming towards us. Go you to
meet him, Ben, and settle your plans quickly. Let us have
no tarrying, so that the thing may be over and done with.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” groaned Ben, and went to meet Gascoyne,
while I stayed behind watching them. They met,
conversed a moment, examined and loaded the pistols,
and then fell to talking again. Presently I saw Ben
exhibit decided signs of dissent, shaking his head
vehemently at what the other said, and growing so
decided in his non-agreement that he came away to
speak to me.</p>

<p>“What think you, Will?” said he. “They want you
to face each other at fifteen paces, which is reasonable
enough, but they also want you to fire in turn, the first
turn to be tossed for. Why, ’tis murder, say I!”</p>

<p>“Nonsense, man,” said I. “Let them have their own
way about it. I have as good a chance of winning the
toss as Watson hath.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis naught but murder!” grumbled Ben. “I wish I
had set the magistrates on you.”</p>

<p>But he went back, and presently he and Gascoyne
took the best of three tosses, and then Ben, with a
lugubrious face, came to say that Dennis was to have
the first shot.</p>

<p>“And they say he shoots well with the pistol,” sighed
Ben. “Heaven turn the bullet from thee, Will! You
are to stand here. Oh, that I had never come into this
murderous business!”</p>

<p>“Come, Ben, be a man. I do not think he will hit
me. See, Gascoyne calls thee.”</p>

<p>So there I stood, a clear mark against the snow-covered
trees, and Dennis Watson stood fifteen paces
away, his pistol hanging down by his side. Somehow
I had no fear that he would hit me. I only felt curious
to know what would happen.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said Tom Gascoyne, “are you ready?
Then, when I say ‘Fire,’ you, Dennis, will raise your
piece and fire instantly.”</p>

<p>“There must be no taking aim,” groaned Ben. “It
were murder if he took aim.”</p>

<p>“There must be no taking aim,” said Gascoyne. “The
pistol must be lifted and fired at the word. Are you
ready?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” I called. “Quite ready.”</p>

<p>I looked straight at Dennis Watson as I spoke, and
saw his eyes staring directly at mine.</p>

<p>“One—two—three,” said Gascoyne slowly and clearly.</p>

<p>But ere he could say the fatal word, someone cried,
“Stop!” in a voice that made us all start and turn. And
there we stood fixed and motionless, looking at Rose
Lisle as she burst into the clearing, her face whiter than
the snow, and her large eyes full of horror at the sight
before her.</p>

<h2>XXI</h2>

<h3>OF CERTAIN JOYFUL EVENTS</h3>

<p>I suppose that a child which is caught in the very midst
of some naughtiness feels pretty much as I did at that
moment. There I stood, with the pistol hanging in my
hand, first staring at Rose and then gradually dropping
my gaze before the shocked and startled look which I
saw in her eyes. Indeed, I felt remarkably ashamed of
myself now that we had been interrupted, and did not
think of the affair in the same light as before. When
Rose came upon the scene Gascoyne was just about to
speak, and he now stood staring at her, his lips still
formed in readiness to give the word which might have
sent me into another world on the instant. Seeing,
however, that the affair was over, he drew himself up,
and muttering, “A woman is always sure to spoil sport,”
he went over towards his principal, who still stood
covering me with his pistol. Rose came across the thicket
towards us. I knew she was looking first at one and
then at the other, but I dare not look at her. I
pretended to be examining the lock of my pistol.</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said Rose, and I knew she was standing
between us and again looking from one to the other with
that gaze I dare not meet, “what is this you would have
done? Fie upon you! Surely you do not call it manly
to steal out here at this hour, as if you were thieves,
so that you might fire at each other? Why, this is a
coward’s action.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” said Ben, “what wise words! Just what I said
myself. Go on, Mistress Rose; go on and spare not.”</p>

<p>“If I had not come when I did,” she continued, paying
no more heed to Ben than if he had been a tree-stump,
“one of you might now have been lying dead. What
sort of news would that have been for his friends?
Brave men, truly, to think so little of other people’s
feelings.”</p>

<p>“Admirable!” cried Ben Tuckett. “Go on; sure-faith,
I could not have said more myself.”</p>

<p>“Put up your pistols,” she said, “put up your pistols
and go home, for pity’s sake. Let us have no fighting
here. Pray God give you better minds of it.”</p>

<p>Now, I never wanted to fight, and wanted less than
ever now, and I was ready enough to put up my pistol
and go. But Dennis Watson was not minded to take
Rose’s advice, neither was he slow in saying so.</p>

<p>“That is all very well, mistress,” said he with a sneer
on his dark face, “but it is not agreeable to me. I came
out here to shoot Will Dale yonder, and as fortune hath
favoured me with the first shot, shoot him I will. So
retire, mistress, if you do not wish to see blood spilt.”</p>

<p>She looked at him very steadily and sternly, for I
think that speech of his had shown her what manner of
man he was, and he somewhat blanched as he met the
glance she gave him. But she came rather closer to
me, keeping herself between me and the pistol in his
hand.</p>

<p>“Then, sir,” she said, “you may shoot him through me.
For I shall not stand aside whatever you say or
threaten.”</p>

<p>“Stand aside, dear Rose,” I said, speaking for the first
time since she entered the clearing. “Let him fire, if
he will: I do not believe he can hit me.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” she said. “There shall be nothing left to chance.”</p>

<p>And there she stood facing Dennis Watson’s pistol,
which he still held ready to discharge. And he, presently
seeing that her purpose was firm, began to mutter threats
and oaths, and then taunts and jeers.</p>

<p>“Ah!” he said, “I see how it is. A pretty plot is this,
and mighty neat in its arrangement. We have been
fooled, Tom Gascoyne. A pretty thing for a man who
is going to fight a duel to arrange matters so that a lady
stops the affair at the right moment. I warrant me
Mistress Rose would not have stepped out so promptly if
our enemy had had first shot.”</p>

<p>Now, this so incensed me that I started forward
fiercely, intending to chastise Dennis for his insolence,
but Rose barred my path and prevented me.</p>

<p>“Leave him alone, Will,” she said, and at the touch
of her hand I restrained myself. “Master Watson,” she
continued, turning to Dennis, “you are a poor, pitiful
liar. If you were aught of a man you would know that
a woman would not lend herself to such a poor trick as
that. Do you think I could not find this matter out for
myself?”</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said Tom Gascoyne, “this affair is at an
end, I think. What say you, Master Tuckett?”</p>

<p>“I say yes,” said Ben. “And very gladly, for ’tis a
cold morning and I am shivering. Let us withdraw our
forces.”</p>

<p>“Come, Dennis,” said Gascoyne, “let us go;” and he
took Watson’s arm to lead him away.</p>

<p>But Dennis went reluctantly, favouring me and Rose
with many an evil glance. And at the edge of the
clearing he turned and looked at us once more, and
cried out, “I will hit you yet, Will Dale, and in your
tenderest spot, too!” and disappeared in the woods,
which echoed to his sneering laughter. And so the duel
was over.</p>

<p>“Beshrew me,” said Ben, “but I am as cold as any
icicle. I shall run homewards, with your permission,
for I doubt not you will be able to bring Mistress Rose
home by yourself, Will.”</p>

<p>And therewith he leapt the fence into the meadows
and went homewards at a dog-trot, so that his short,
sturdy figure was soon out of sight in the dim winter’s
light, and Rose and I were alone. There we stood in the
clearing for a moment or two, neither of us speaking.
I think she was looking at me, but I am quite sure that
I did not dare to look at her. Yet it was necessary to
say some word or other, so at last I plucked up courage
to speak.</p>

<p>“Mistress Rose,” I said, “I beg your pardon.”</p>

<p>After this was out I felt bold enough to meet her gaze.
She was looking at me with reproachful eyes, and I
noticed that she was very pale, and that her face bore
an expression of pain which I had never seen there
before. She said nothing when I spoke, but still looked
at me. And yet I could see that she was not angry with
me as she had been with Dennis, for her expression was
more like that of a mother whose child had offended
her by some act of naughtiness than of real anger at
my conduct.</p>

<p>“I beg your pardon,” I said again. “I have brought
you from your bed on a morning like this all because I
am headstrong and foolish. If I had not been so fiery I
should not have caused you so much anxiety. If I had
taken Ben’s advice I should have done better. However,
what is done is done. Only I hope you will forgive me
for causing you so much trouble.”</p>

<p>“It was not that,” she said, “not that. Suppose you
had been killed, Will—suppose I had come here just in
time to see you fall dead?”</p>

<p>She shuddered, and raised her hands to her face as
if to shut out the sight she spoke of. I went nearer to
her and laid my hand on her shoulder.</p>

<p>“And if you had, Rose, would you have been so
troubled? There is many a better man than I shot in
a duel. Would you have cared so much?”</p>

<p>She lifted her eyes to mine for an instant and looked
at me, and then, somehow or other, my arms were round
her, and her head was lying upon my shoulder, and our
lips had met in their first kiss. It was all so sudden
and so soon over, and without a word spoken by either,
and yet I knew that she was mine for ever. “My dear,
my dear!” I said, “so you have some love in your heart
for me after all my folly and thoughtlessness?”</p>

<p>“So much,” she whispered, “so much that it filled all
my heart, Will. All my heart!”</p>

<p>“And it is mine?”</p>

<p>“Yours, if you will have it. And could you never see
that before? Oh, Will, and I have loved you ever since
you were a great boy and I a little maiden scarcely up
to your shoulder. How slow you were to see it!”</p>

<p>“Why, my dear,” I said, “I never did see it, only
somehow I fancied and hoped it might be so. And now
that I know it is so, I can hardly believe it. Kiss me
again, Rose, so that I may know it is no dream, but
blessed reality.”</p>

<p>I can remember all that as if it were yesterday. It
was a cold, gray winter morning, and the snow, six or
eight inches deep under foot, hung from the trees around
us in all sorts of fantastic drapery. There was a strange
stillness in the woods now that we were alone, broken
only by a robin that came hopping along the branches
above our heads, and chirping at us or at his fellows
that were trying to find something eatable under the
firs and pines. Yet I felt nothing of the cold, and the
wintry prospect might have been a fine summer night,
so much summer had she put into my heart, this dear
one of mine. For now all barriers were suddenly swept
away between us, and there was her sweet face resting
against my breast, rosy and full of life now, with the
dear eyes looking shyly into mine, and the sweeter
mouth ready to say, “I love you,” in unison with the
eloquent eyes. But of this I need write no more, for
every true and happy lover hath experience of what I
might say.</p>

<p>So we went homewards across the snow-bound
meadows, feeling, I think, as if we were walking
through some Paradise, rather than across the good old
fields where every landmark was familiar to me. And
all the way my heart was singing gaily to itself, and its
song was of love and hope and happiness, and I forgot
all about Dennis Watson and his threats, and had no
memory of the sad strife then agitating the land, for I
could think of nothing but Rose. And so hand-in-hand
we went into the great kitchen, where Ben was
warming his blue fingers against the fire and audibly
lamenting his folly in going out on such a morning.
“And on such an errand too,” growled he, when Rose
had gone away to remove her snow-covered garments.
“Yea, indeed, if I go on like this I shall soon let out my
head for the crows to pick at. For indeed my brains
must be soft enow when I go forth to see two fools shoot
at each other.”</p>

<p>“Hold thy peace, chatterer!” I said. “What, man,
this is the happiest morning I ever knew. Ah, old
Ben, thou talkest about happiness! Why, man, thou
knowest not the meaning of that word. Indeed, I think
nobody was ever happy until now.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” said Ben, rising up and steadily regarding
me with questioning eyes. “Oh! Ah! Why now, but
really, Will, is thy brain turning? Nay, he is sane
enough. Why, man, what has happened? Ah, now
I see it all thou hast been making matters square
with Mistress Rose. Am I right, Will?”</p>

<p>“Right indeed, Ben. Congratulate me. Is she not
divine, eh? Is she not lovelier than a dream, eh, Ben?”</p>

<p>“There is a little mole in her left cheek,” said Ben.
“ ’Tis a beauty-spot, man. But what knowest thou
about beauty?”</p>

<p>“Enough to tell thee that thou hast got one of the
fairest women in all the kingdom, old Will. Ye will
make a grand pair. Will, what dost say if you and
Rose and Lucy and I get married soon? All at the
same time, eh? Say upon Easter Monday? Is it not
a good idea, lad?”</p>

<p>“Good enough, lad, but the ladies must be consulted.”</p>

<p>“If only Jack would bring himself a sweetheart home
from the wars,” said Ben, “we might all be married
together. But I fear me Jack is not a man for matrimony.
Yea, he will live and die a bachelor.”</p>

<p>Now, that day will always remain fresh and green in
my mind, even though I live to be a hundred years old,
for it was a day of rejoicing and gladness. First of
all, there was the presenting Rose to my mother as her
daughter indeed, in which new capacity she was welcomed
warmly and gladly, for my mother had learnt to love
her as if she were really her own. As for Lucy, she
was as pleased as if Ben had brought her some piece
of good news affecting their own prospects. And old
Jacob Trusty, to whom I soon told my story, was so
delighted that for that day he did little in the way of
work, but remained giving orders to his assistant—for
he now had a boy to help him with the cattle—and
relating anecdotes concerning previous brides in our
family, none of whom, he said, could quite compare
with Mistress Rose Lisle.</p>

<p>“An I were thou, William,” said Jacob, “I should not
delay matters very long. There is Master Benjamin
and Lucy are ready enough for a ring, I warrant; why,
then, should ye not all marry at the same time? ’Twill
be a gay sight and a good one for sore eyes, that same
wedding.”</p>

<p>But these are troublous times to marry in, Jacob,”
I answered. “And then, you see, Master Lisle is away
at the wars, and we must have his consent before we
settle anything.”</p>

<p>“Tut, lad, Black Phil I warrant will say naught
against a Dale marrying his daughter. Marry, not he
indeed! There is no better family than ours amongst
all the yeomen of Yorkshire. Well, you have done well,
William, to win such a bonny lass. But waste no time,
lad. Let me see thy children on my knees before I die.”</p>

<p>“I hope my children, if I have any, will be well on
in years before you come to die, Jacob. Why, you are
a young man yet.”</p>

<p>“Young in mind, lad, but old in body. What! I was
middle-aged when you were born. Ah, I remember
that day very well indeed. We were harvesting in the
twelve-acre. Then the word came along that a son was
born. So I threw down my scythe and went over to
the house and looked at thee, William, for the first time.
As red as my Sunday scarf thou wert. But a real Dale,
and weighing, I should think, about ten pound, or maybe
eleven. Old Mother Eyre of Thorpe nursed thee—now
dead and gone is she. Thou couldst walk at twelve
months, but thou didst not talk for six months after
that. Well, but ’tis a long time ago.”</p>

<p>Now, this was not the only joyful event of that
memorable day, for we had another great surprise before
the evening was over. I had gone outside to walk
round the buildings, as was my custom every night,
for I liked to know that my horses and cattle were
safely housed and fed, and as I crossed the yard from
the stables to the house I saw in the dim light two
horsemen endeavouring to open the gate of the paddock.
And then all of a sudden the house door was opened
and Rose was in her father’s arms, and we were shaking
hands all round and all talking together, for Philip Lisle
and Jack Drumbleforth were home again from the wars,
safe and sound, and we were once more united round the
old hearthstone.</p>

<h2>XXII</h2>

<h3>OF JACK DRUMBLEFORTH’S RETURN HOME</h3>

<p>You may be quite sure that we threw wide open our
hearts and doors and welcomed our travellers with no
little rejoicing. For though they had not been away
from us for such a great length of time, having only
been absent during the autumn and winter, yet it
appeared a considerable season, and we were heartily
glad to see their faces again. And so they were quickly
in the great kitchen and everybody was shaking hands
with them and the women were all talking together, so
that you could not hear yourself speak for noise. Nay,
so busied were they with asking questions and giving
their own news as to what had happened during the
travellers’ absence, that it was all Philip and Jack could
do to get a word in or to swallow a mouthful of the food
and drink which my mother and Lucy hastened to set on
the table. But after awhile, when the first tumult of
rejoicing was over and we were all sat round the hearth
in the firelight, I was able to get a good look at my two
old friends and notice how their adventures had fared
with them. And I quickly perceived that even those
few months of campaigning had changed Jack Drumbleforth
in appearance, if in nothing else. For he was now
bronzed and tanned like one who has been out much in
all weathers, and he had grown a great beard and
moustache, so that his face was much changed. But
the same old eyes of honest gray looked out from above
the same somewhat snubbed nose, and the eye twinkled
when he said a sly thing just as in the old days. I
could not think what Parson Drumbleforth would say to
his son’s altered appearance, for Jack looked less like a
learned clerk than ever. He had gotten himself a slight
sword-cut on his right cheek, and this, while giving him
a military air, also added something of distinction to
him, according to the girls. Yea, indeed, in his scarlet
coat and sash and great buff boots, with the sword at his
side and his hair and beard trimmed in the Stuart
fashion, Jack looked a very different fellow to the old
Jack that used to make fun for us in the old days.</p>

<p>I suppose that nobody was more content that night
than my mother, who, having a great horror of war and
bloodshed, was only too well pleased to see our warriors
home again with their heads and limbs still preserved to
them. But she had been better pleased if Philip Lisle
could have given her more satisfactory news about the
war, which she wished to see terminate there and then,
so dreadful a thing did it seem to her that Englishmen
should fight with Englishmen. So she quickly began to
make inquiry of Philip Lisle of the war and its prospects.</p>

<p>“What think you, sir?” said my mother. “Will the
war soon come to an end?”</p>

<p>But at that he shook his head.</p>

<p>“Nay, madam,” said he, “I cannot answer that
question, for I know not what to say. However, if I am
to give an opinion, I should say that it will not. The
issues are too great and the feeling too bitter for it to
end yet. If it does end speedily it will only be by one
party waiving its claims.”</p>

<p>“And neither will do that,” said Jack. “It will be war
to the knife yet awhile. A sad enough thing it is,
Mistress Dale, to have to cut your brother’s throat or
fire an ounce of lead through his body, but that is what
Englishmen are doing just now, and must continue to
do, I fear.”</p>

<p>“Alas! a sad thing enough,” said my mother. “But
what think you? Will the King prevail in this contest?
We hear so much here that differs in opinion, some
saying that the Parliament will win in the end, and some
that the King will finally prevail over his enemies.
What have you to say to it, sir?”</p>

<p>“A few months ago,” said Philip, “I should have
answered your question with confidence, madam, for I
could never have brought myself to believe that this land
of England would have risen in open rebellion against
the rightful monarch. Nay, I felt sure that his Majesty
had only to erect his standard in order to secure the
support of the greater portion of his people, before whose
arm the malcontents would quickly yield. For Englishmen
to rise against the throne they have built so carefully,
seemed to me a most strange thing, and I felt
assured that that bad feeling, if it did exist, could not
exist long. And yet it would appear, madam, that the
feeling of disaffection against his Majesty is deepening
rather than lessening. I know not how it is: certain I
am that he hath a kind heart and means well towards
his subjects.”</p>

<p>“Yea,” said Jack, “a kind heart he hath, but a sad
face. A sadder I never saw, and I have seen his some
hundreds of times these last three months. He looks,
Mistress Dale, as if he had no heart to smile, but is
rather pondering on the fate that hath made him to
be at war with his people. Now about politics I care
naught and know little, but of this I am sure: I will
fight for the King while ever there is any fight left in
me, for it is my honest belief that he means well.
Moreover, he is the King, which is good enough for a
plain Englishman.”</p>

<p>“There are men nowadays, however,” said Philip Lisle,
“who care naught for kings or priests, being persuaded
that every man hath a right to judge for himself and
please himself, and it is these men who are stirring up
sedition against his Majesty. Now, I say this—every
man hath a right to judge for himself between right and
wrong, between what is bad and what is good in his own
heart, but he hath no right to judge between himself
and lawfully constituted authority. For as Holy
Scripture saith—all power is of God, and according to that
teaching, those who fight against the King do fight
against God. I say this as a plain man who takes a
plain meaning of Scripture.”</p>

<p>“Master Cromwell interpreteth not Scripture in that
way,” said Jack. “Why, from what I hear he hath
Scriptural warrant for everything he does. He is
persuaded that the King is a common enemy to the people,
and would, I doubt not, clap his Majesty into safe
keeping, or even slay him as being such. They say that he
fights with the Scriptures in one hand and the sword in
the other.”</p>

<p>“Whatever the man is else,” said Philip Lisle, “he is a
soldier and a great general. His regiment will make its
mark whenever he leads it.”</p>

<p>“Yea, it will so!” said Jack. “It would do thee good,
Will, to see these psalm-singing knaves who sing and
slay with the heartiest good-will. Finely drilled and
equipped they are, and have their heart in their work,
like Master Cromwell, their leader. I have heard that
he will have no man in his company who does not make
this war a personal matter. He wants naught of
swashbucklers and such like, of which sort we have too many
in our army—men who fight for fighting’s sake.”</p>

<p>“And what, sir, will be done, asked my mother, “if
the King’s Majesty doth not prevail in this war?”</p>

<p>“Nay, madam, I know not. Perhaps we shall be ruled
by a Parliament, or maybe some of those who are now
stirring up the country against the King will assume
the King’s place.”</p>

<p>“And what would they do with the King?” said Lucy.</p>

<p>“Marry, child, there are men in England this day
who would gladly cut off the King’s head and have done
with him altogether. Yea, and would compass land and
sea to do it. But what if they do? The King never
dies, and if they slay Charles the First, Charles the
Second will arise in his place. But much will come to
pass ere ever these things happen. Meanwhile, let us
be thankful we are with you again, safe and sound, save
for a scratch or two.”</p>

<p>“I have an old father at home,” said Jack, rising from
his chair, “and it is time I sought him. Will, come
with me to the gate and see me depart.”</p>

<p>“Nay, I will ride with you, I said, and went and
saddled our horses. I wanted to have a word or two
with Jack in private. So I bade them leave the door
open for me and set out with my old friend along the
highway towards Darrington. It was a dark night and
a cold one, but not so dark nor so cold that Jack and I
could not understand each other.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a grand thing, Will, lad,” said he, as we rode
along the familiar road, “ ’tis a grand thing to be home
once more amongst the old faces and places. How goes
everything with you, Will? Ben Tuckett—how prospers
worthy Ben? Is he in love as deeply as ever with
Mistress Lucy?”</p>

<p>“Ben prospers exceedingly, Jack, and is growing sleek
and comely. As for love, he is deeper and deeper in it
every day.”</p>

<p>“I am glad of that,” he answered. “When once a
man hath fallen in love with a maid, he doth well to
advance in the sweet passion rather than draw back.
But now, Will, hast thou not made some progress in this
same art of love since last we met?”</p>

<p>“Enough, Jack, to have come to the conclusion that
Mistress Rose Lisle is the fairest creature under God’s
sun. Yea, Jack, and I have told her so some scores of
times already. So there is another pair of us besides
Ben and Lucy. It only needs for thee to find a mate,
and then thy father could marry all three pairs at one
time.”</p>

<p>“Nay, lad, you had best not wait for me, or you will
put off your happiness a long time. Well, thy news is
good news, old lad, and I am glad to hear it.”</p>

<p>But I had more news for him than that, and proceeded
to tell him of my adventure with Dennis Watson,
and of the latter’s threat to do me further injury,
together with all particulars of the duel and its
consequences.</p>

<p>“It would seem that the old sore has not yet healed,”
said Jack. “Certainly you will have to reckon scores
with Dennis sooner or later, Will. Be watchful, for he
will do you an injury in an underhand fashion if he gets
the chance. And hark ye, if you think that he hath a
leaning towards Mistress Rose, watch him with both
eyes. You will have your work set, for Dennis Watson
is an ugly customer at any time, being, I take it, both
cruel and ingenious in his contrivances.”</p>

<p>“Let him do his worst,” I answered; “I will account
for him in the end.”</p>

<p>By this time we had come to Darrington, and rode
quietly up the village street until we came against the
vicarage, which is a plain, four-square house standing
at the foot of Church Lane and communicating with
the church by a path that leads through the vicarage
garden into the graveyard. Now, it being very late,
and the whole village in quietness, we did not wish to
make any great noise, so we stole round by the lane into
the Vicar’s farmyard, across which we went very quietly,
fastening our steeds to the stable-door meanwhile.
There was a light shining through the lattice-work of
the pantry, so that we judged Mistress Deborah to be.
awake. In this suspicion we were right, for presently,
creeping up to the open lattice-work, we heard her
soundly rating the cat, which in its haste to escape
from the pantry had knocked over and spilt a bowl of
cream.</p>

<p>“A plague on ye,” said Mistress Deborah, “ye nasty,
good-for-nothing varmint, to waste all my cream that
was meant for his reverence’s porridge in the morning!
How am I to replace that, I would like to know, and not
one of the cows yielding a quart a day! Sure there is
nothing but worry and disappointment in this world!”</p>

<p>She was now close upon the lattices and, peeping
through, we could see her. “She is just the same as
ever,” whispered Jack. “Let’s tap the lattice and give
her a fright.”</p>

<p>Whereupon he let his fist fall with such weight upon
the lattice that Mistress Deborah uttered a scream and
seemed likely to let fall her brass candlestick and leave
herself in darkness.</p>

<p>“Mercy on us!” said she, “what’s that? More work
of the cat’s, I warrant me. An Master John had been
home, I should say ’twas him. Ah, poor Master John,
indeed! ’Tis a poor trade, fighting, and him his
reverence’s only son, too. Well, well, everybody to their
likes.”</p>

<p>“Ho, Deborah!” said Jack, in a deep voice, “Deborah!”</p>

<p>Now, Mistress Deborah no sooner heard, her name
pronounced than she whipped out of the pantry and
flung open the kitchen door, so that in another instant
she had seized Jack by the neck and was squeezing the
breath out of his body.</p>

<p>“Ah!” quoth she, when she had welcomed him in this fashion.
“As if I did not know your voice, Master John!
I warrant me you have come up to yon lattice a thousand
and one times and said, ‘Ho, Deborah!’ in just
those tones. And you are safe and sound and no bones
broken! The Lord be thanked! Is the wars over,
Master John, and did—“</p>

<p>“Good Deborah,” said Jack, “ask me naught now, but
let me to my father. Where is he is he well?”</p>

<p>“Why, well enough but for a little cold in the nose,
Master John, got by burying Gaffer Burton’s grandchild
t’other day—a wet, slushy day as ever I saw. Oh, why,
he’s in his own chamber, Master John, with his books;
but you must tread soft, for his reverence is like to be
at his devotions.”</p>

<p>“Come with me, Will,” said Jack; and we passed
through the kitchen to the room where the Vicar kept
his books and composed his sermons and saw such of
his parishioners as called upon him. The door was a
little way open, and a broad beam of light shone through
the opening into the hall. We stole quietly up to this
and peeped through. True enough, Parson Drumbleforth
was at his devotions, kneeling at a little desk with
his great Prayer-book before him, and his white hair
shining in the lamplight. And just as we came within
hearing he was praying for his son, who was there within
a yard or two of him.</p>

<p>“And take care, good Lord, of my son Jack, who hath
gone to the wars, and bring him back to me, who have
naught but him left to love—”</p>

<p>“Father, father!” cried Jack, bursting in. “Here I
am, father, back again, safe and sound.”</p>

<p>And so I left them looking into each other’s eyes, and
went out and rode away in the darkness towards home.</p>

<h2>XXIII</h2>

<h3>OF THE COMING NEAR OF WAR.</h3>

<p>Even as I had expected, Philip Lisle consented willingly
to give up his Rose to my keeping. From our first time
of meeting there had been a kind of fellow-feeling ’twixt
him and me, and we had grown to love each other in
more than ordinary friendliness, so that he felt that I
was to be trusted with his daughter’s happiness. But
neither he nor my mother would hear aught of marriage
yet awhile. Better to wait, said they, even were it ten
years, until the land was settled, than to marry in the
midst of so much anxiety and trouble. For at any time,
said Philip, the tide of war might surge round us with
flame and bloodshed, and things might occur which
would be harder to cope with married than single. Better
to wait until the land was at rest and we could marry
with peace all around us.</p>

<p>So now there was a double inducement to me to long
for the ending of the war, and I looked forward to the
coming of peace with a hot impatience. But peace was
not to come upon us for many a long day yet. With
the advent of spring in that year, 1643, the rival armies
began manœuvring once more, and both sides became
active in soliciting help and assistance. The King had
taken up his headquarters at Oxford in readiness for the
campaign, and had there gathered his army around him.
Thither, ere spring was over, repaired Philip Lisle and
Jack, having remained but a short time with us, and
from them, at irregular intervals, came news of the war.
At first their news was not over good. The King lost
Reading. But then came tidings of success. The royal
army overcame its opponents at Roundway Down and
laid siege to Bristol. By the end of June that great
city was in the King’s hands, and the counties of Devon,
Somerset, Hampshire, and Wiltshire came under his
power. The Parliamentarians began to lose heart.
Hampden, one of their principal leaders, had been slain
in a skirmish. The royal troops laid siege to Gloucester
and seemed likely to take it. Everything looked rosy
for the King’s cause, and loyal people began to pluck up
a good spirit. There was some serious talk amongst the
Parliamentarians of a treaty, which no doubt would
have been carried out but for the pressure put upon the
Commons by the London crowds, who swarmed round
the House and refused to have any treaty. Then, however,
came reverses to the King’s cause. The Earl of
Essex raised the siege of Gloucester. Turning away
from that city, he found the Royalist army barring his
path at Newbury. A battle followed which neither side
could claim. Essex continued his march. If it had not
been for the fine powers of the Parliamentary infantry
he would have suffered defeat, but the foot had been
finely drilled and officered and withstood the fiery
impulse of the Royalist charge with rock-like firmness.
In this battle Falkland fell, weary, men said, of the war
and its horrors. So matters stood after the battle of
Newbury, each side being pretty much as it was before
the campaign began.</p>

<p>But meanwhile there were other matters at work, as
we heard through various channels. On the first day of
July in that year the Synod known as the Westminster
Assembly began to sit. It had two objects—to make
England Presbyterian, and to bring the Scots to the
help of the Parliamentary army. Perhaps the latter
was the real object, as Parson Drumbleforth said, and the
former the means whereby it was to be achieved. For
with the Scots it was a case of no Presbyterianism, no
Scottish army. Then came the making of that famous
matter the Solemn League and Covenant, which was
signed by members of Parliament who thereby bound
themselves to bring the religion of England, Scotland,
and Ireland into conformity. This Solemn League and
Covenant became everywhere the test of faithfulness to
the Parliamentary cause. Its effect began to be seen at
once. The fierce, persecuting spirit of the Presbyterian
broke out on every side. Anything that savoured of
Episcopacy was ruthlessly destroyed or mutilated. The
Cross at Cheapside was broken to pieces, and a similar
fate soon overtook Charing Cross. The images, crucifixes,
and altars of the ancient parish churches were destroyed;
the painted windows were broken, and the spirit of
wanton mischief seemed to be let loose throughout the
land. The Earl of Manchester went to Cambridge and
drove out from the University all who refused to fall in
with the Covenant. There had been much talk about
the persecution of the King, but under the new régime
men were not even permitted to think for themselves.
Anything more intolerant of other men’s opinions than
the Presbyterianism of that day there could not be.</p>

<p>Now, however, rose up a new party, which combated
the cruel intolerance of the Presbyterians, and finally
vanquished it. The Independents, as they were called,
were for liberty of conscience. They wanted it for
themselves, and what they desired for themselves they
were just enough to wish others to enjoy. They pleaded
for full liberty for all men, Turks, Papists, Socinians,
as for themselves. The Puritans, iron-bound and rigid in
their love of mere outward uniformity, regarded this new
doctrine with horror. They wished to keep the three
kingdoms under their own rule, and to stamp out every
other form of worship than their own Presbyterianism.
They cried out loudly at the teachings of the Independents,
and complained that such a dangerous doctrine
as liberty of conscience should have arisen from a body
which in a sense formed part of themselves. But the
doctrine of liberty steadily gained ground. It was not
probable that the gloomy religion of Scotland would ever
be forced upon the English people, and men who saw
their parish churches mutilated and destroyed by the
fanatics of the League and Covenant, gained from what
they saw an unconquerable aversion to the system which
it was attempted to force upon them.</p>

<p>Now, at this time there were really three forces fighting
for the supremacy in England—the King, the Presbyterians,
and the Independents, and men who had eyes to
see and ears to hear looked on at the three-cornered
contest with eager hearts. The Parliamentary leaders
on their side watched it with more than ordinary anxiety,
for the new force, the Independents, lay in their own
army under the command of that extraordinary farmer
of Huntingdon, Oliver Cromwell. Whatever were this
man’s faults, and whatever his virtues—and both have been
doubtless exaggerated by his friends and enemies—there
was one thing about him in which he was great
above all Englishmen, namely, his resolute determination
not to allow the Presbyterians to stamp out national
life and thought in this land which is our own. How he
and his Ironsides put the Presbyterian power aside, and
indirectly made for the restoration of the English spirit
you will see as this history advances. Already Cromwell
was becoming a power in the land. The counties of
Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Huntingdonshire,
and Hertfordshire had at his instigation bound themselves
together under the name of the Eastern Association. In
August, 1643, the Earl of Manchester took command of
the associated forces, Cromwell being really his guiding
spirit. Then within these counties Royalism was put
down, and after beating the Royalist forces at Winceby
on October 11, Cromwell held himself in readiness to
attack the King’s army in Yorkshire.</p>

<p>But in Yorkshire at that time men were for the King,
and the Royalist forces were largely spread over the
county. The Marquis of Newcastle had raised the siege
of Hull, and had succeeded in establishing a fair degree
of power in many important districts and centres. In
Yorkshire, Sir Thomas Fairfax, commanding the Parliamentary
troops, was making a hard struggle to retain
his ground, and was watching such towns as Leeds and
Bradford, while at the same time he kept an eye on the
fortified places, like Pontefract and Knaresborough.
Little by little, however, Fairfax was being driven back,
when an event happened which brought matters to a
crisis. The Solemn League and Covenant was signed.
A committee of Englishmen and Scotchmen were appointed to
superintend the operations of the army. These arrangements
duly carried out, the Scotch forces under the command of
Leslie, Earl of Leven, crossed the border and advanced into
Yorkshire. In June, 1644, Leven joined his forces to those
of Manchester and Fairfax, and laid siege to the Marquis of
Newcastle at York.</p>

<p>So now at last the red fire of war was close upon us,
for the rival armies were, so to speak, but a stone’s-throw
away. All day long we heard messages of some sort;
now that the Scots were fifty thousand strong and would
infallibly sweep away the King and all his army; now
that the Royalist troops were on the march northwards
to relieve Newcastle at York; and now that ere
four-and-twenty hours had passed we should hear the booming
of the rival artillery. But we heard no news from Philip
or Jack; nay, we had no news of them ’twixt January
and June in that year 1644, so that we were oft anxious
about their welfare and wondered what had become of
them. Those months indeed were remarkably trying
ones to all of us, for my mother was anxious and afraid
of the war coming our way, and Rose was troubled about
her father, and Lucy fretted lest the enemy should shoot
Ben in any of their skirmishes round Pontefract, which
they seemed likely to besiege; and I was impatient and
fretful, wishing that they would make an end of the
matter, so that I might marry my dear one and live in
peace on my land. For it seemed a long time to wait
for her, and I was more impatient every day, and wished
Roundhead and Cavalier could adjust their differences
more speedily than they seemed desirous of doing.</p>

<p>But perhaps none of us were so anxious and troubled
at this time as worthy Ben Tuckett, who, by reason of
his residence in Pontefract market-place, did hear much
news on both sides of the question. For Ben never by
word or deed let either party see that he favoured or
disfavoured them, but talked little and listened much, saying
in excuse that it is a deal better to be seen than to be
heard, and that silence is pure gold, while speech is but
ordinary silver. Nevertheless, whatever Ben heard he
turned over in his mind with no little diligence, never
forgetting anything nor letting any little matter slip.
He mixed freely with men of both parties, each side
curiously enough believing him to be one of themselves,
and in this way he got to hear matters which ordinary
folk did not hear of. But Master Ben’s love of knowledge
ere long brought him into much trouble and perplexity
of mind, for he presently found out that the
Parliamentary troops would certainly besiege the Castle,
which was now strongly garrisoned and equipped by the
Royalists under Colonel Lowther. This news was
disquieting to a peaceable and quiet tradesman like Ben,
for he could not help foreseeing there would be bullets
and cannon-balls flying about the town, and sallies and
skirmishes going on, and it occurred to him that a
rough-handed soldiery might not be very nice about taking
goods out of his shop without paying for what they took.
What with thoughts like this and fears lest a stray bullet
should some day find a billet in his brain as he stood at
his shop-door, poor Ben grew careworn and anxious-looking,
and lost a good deal of his sleek appearance.
But he never abated one jot of his curiosity about
coming events, and whenever he came over to Dale’s
Field he had always some fresh scrap of news for us,
gleaned from Royalist or Parliamentarian. And whatever
it was, there was always one burden to Ben’s song
concerning it—the war was coming upon us.</p>

<h2>XXIV</h2>

<h3>OF MY RIDE WITH THE DESPATCHES</h3>

<p>And now, whether I would or not, I was forced into
active participation in this war which was being fought
out ’twixt Englishman and Englishman, and made to
take a part in it which I had never dreamt of playing.
It was the first day of July, 1644. A hot, cloudless
day it had been, with never a speck on the sky that one
could interpret into a sign of rain. We had got our hay
in, and Timothy Grass and another man were busily
engaged in thatching the two great stacks that we had
built at the end of our stack-yard. Early as it was, our
corn was beginning to turn, and I looked forward to
commencing harvest in three weeks’ time, feeling sure
that the oats would then be ready. We had had no rain
during the hay-harvest, and I hoped that we should be
similarly favoured during the corn-harvest. If only the
war would keep away from us until we got our corn in, I
felt it would be well.</p>

<p>I walked out with Rose that evening through the
meadows leading towards Went Vale. Unconsciously
my feet turned in the direction I had taken that spring
morning long years before, when I set out for the ruined
sheep-fold to find the stormcock’s nest.</p>

<p>“It was the first time I had gone bird’s-nesting that
year,” I said to Rose as we came upon the scene. “I
remember how quickly I ran off when old Jacob told me
about the stormcock’s nest. It was in yonder tree; see,
there is where I climbed up the trunk. Up I climbed
and down I fell, lighting on my thick skull. And then
came an angel clad in a red hood and cloak, and singing
as she came.”</p>

<p>“And she found,” said Rose, “a sturdy-looking boy,
sitting upon the ground and rubbing the crown of his
head with both hands. A boy who evidently liked not
to have anything done for him, for when the angel, as
you call her, wanted to help him he would have no help.
Nay, in those days, Will, if I had offered to kiss you
better, as we do with children, I think you would have
refused.”</p>

<p>“Did I refuse when you kissed me that day you went
away with your father? “</p>

<p>“My father?” she said. “I wonder where he is, Will.
And poor Jack? ’Tis a dreadful thing, this war, to
separate loving hearts one from another.”</p>

<p>“It is, Rose, for it is separating you from me. How
long, I wonder, shall we have to wait? Every moment
seems a day, every day a year.”</p>

<p>So talking, we went down into the valley and turned
along to Wentbridge by the road along which I had
passed that night I found Philip Lisle and Rose on the
bridge. We stayed there talking a few minutes, and
then went slowly up the hill towards Dale’s Field. The
Great North Road was quiet that night; quieter indeed
than it had been for many weeks, for lately there had
been a regular stream of folk along it in both directions.
That night, however, we climbed the hill out of
Wentbridge without passing or meeting aught more than a
drover taking his cattle by easy stages to Doncaster.</p>

<p>“How quiet the road is to-night!” said Rose, as we
came to the level against Dale’s Field. “Listen, there
is not a sound to be heard.”</p>

<p>We stood still to listen. My ears, quick to hear
anything in the open air, caught the faint sound of a
horse’s gallop far off along the road.</p>

<p>“Yes, there is a horseman coming along,” I said; “I
can hear his horse’s feet. He is a long way off
yet—somewhere between Barnsdale and Wentbridge, I think.”</p>

<p>“Let us stand under the trees here and watch him
pass,” said Rose; “I like to wait in the darkness when
all is quiet, and hear the horse’s feet come nearer and
nearer along the highway.”</p>

<p>We drew back into the shadow of the trees that overhung
our barns, and waited, listening to the sound that
came nearer and nearer, now sinking almost into silence
as horse and rider dipped into some slight hollow, now
growing louder as they climbed some little hill. After
awhile we heard him coming down the road into Wentbridge;
then the horse clattered loudly over the bridge,
and the sounds grew fainter as his gallop dropped to a
trot, and then to a walk as he mounted the stiff hill we
had just climbed. And at last we heard the panting
and blowing of the tired animal as it came out upon the
level road again, and its rider strove to spur it forward
at top speed.</p>

<p>“Here he comes,” said Rose, pointing through the dim
light. “Poor horse, how tired it seems!”</p>

<p>Tired indeed the horse was, from the jaded way it
stepped out. But what was the matter with the rider,
who reeled in his saddle like a drunken man, clinging
to it with one hand, while he grasped the reins with the
other?</p>

<p>“On, good Diamond!” he was saying as he came
abreast of us. “On, on, ere this devilish wound overcome
me! O, Heaven! how the blood runs yet! Diamond, I say—”</p>

<p>“Oh!” said Rose, clutching my arm. “See, he is falling!”</p>

<p>I started forward just in time to catch the man as he
rolled heavily from his saddle. He sank into my arms
and I felt something wet and warm as my hand touched
his breast. The poor horse stopped, and stood panting
and sighing in the middle of the road.</p>

<p>“Hold up, sir,” I said. “My house is near by; let me
help you into it.”</p>

<p>“He has fainted!” cried Rose. “Oh, Will, carry him
into the house. I will run before to warn them.”</p>

<p>She ran on, and I lifted the man in my arms and
bore him across the orchard, his horse following behind
me like a dog. I laid the man down on the great settle
and looked at him. He had indeed fainted, and there
was blood on his clothes and on my hands where I had
touched him. A young man he was, of handsome
countenance, and dressed like a Royalist officer. I
wondered while my mother was attending to him what
he was doing in such a plight.</p>

<p>“He is coming round,” said my mother. And presently
he opened his eyes and looked at us.</p>

<p>“Do not speak, good sir,” said my mother. “You are
amongst friends. Lie still and let us do what we can
for you.”</p>

<p>And she began to cut away his garments to get at the
wound, which she found to be a shot in the left shoulder,
just high enough to have missed the heart. This she
dressed and bandaged with rags and soft linen, so that
the bleeding stopped and a little colour began to come
into the man’s white face.</p>

<p>“Rest you there, sir,” said my mother. “We will not
move you yet awhile, and we will put cushions under
your shoulders to relieve the hard couch.”</p>

<p>The man shook his head sadly.</p>

<p>“I thank you, mistress,” said he, “warmly and truly,
for you are a good Samaritan. But rest I cannot, for I
must on and away at once. If only I had another
horse!”</p>

<p>“Nay, sir,” said my mother, “you cannot go forward
to-night except at peril of your life. Be content to rest.”</p>

<p>“I cannot, mistress,” said he, trying to rise. “Even
if I die for it I must on. I am losing time here now.
Let me up and away.”</p>

<p>“Sir,” said I, “I would not keep you for a moment
against your will, but I tell you plainly that if you
mount again you will be a dead man ere you have
ridden half a mile.”</p>

<p>He looked at me with despairing eyes when I said
this, and groaned sadly.</p>

<p>“Can I do aught to serve you?” I said.</p>

<p>He shook his head, but looked searchingly at me. “I
do not know where I am,” he said presently.</p>

<p>“You are in the house of William Dale, yeoman,” I
said. “I am he. If I can help you, tell me how.”</p>

<p>Then I bent lower and said in a low voice: “You look
like a Royalist; we are all Royalists here, and you may
trust us.”</p>

<p>“Ah!” said he. “Is that the truth, Master Dale?
Do not mock me. I am near death, I believe.”</p>

<p>“It is the truth,” I answered. “See, yonder young
lady is the daughter of Philip Lisle, who holds office
under the King—you may know him?”</p>

<p>“Indeed I do, Master Dale,” said he. “Well, I trust
myself to your kindness, and more than myself. Look
you—I am carrying despatches to the Marquis of
Newcastle at York. He must have them to-night or
’twill go ill with him. And here I am, winged in this
way by some vile padfoot five miles back. What can
I do?”</p>

<p>But I knew what was to be done ere ever he had
finished speaking.</p>

<p>“Be at peace, sir,” I said: “I will carry the despatches
to Lord Newcastle. Tell me what to do, and give me
the packet and let me go. It is now close upon eleven
o’clock: I shall be in York by two.”</p>

<p>“But you must avoid the enemy,” he said. “They are
surrounding him, and you will have your work set.
Well, here is the packet—prithee keep it safely. Say
that Captain Trevor was bringing it and was shot on the
highway. And so farewell, and—”</p>

<p>He had fainted again from over-exertion, and my
mother and Rose came forward to help him. I put the
packet into my coat and went out. My horse, a great
beast that could carry me a whole day without tiring,
was in his stall, and uttered a little cry of joy as I put
my hand on his neck. I lighted the stable lanthorn and
saddled and bridled him quickly. And then a thought
struck me, and I took the saddle off again and pushed
the packet between the leather and the padding. If I
was caught they would search me thoroughly, but my
horse’s saddle might perchance escape.</p>

<p>I led Captain out into the paddock and went down to
the house door and looked inside for a moment. My
mother still bent over the wounded man. I beckoned
Rose to me.</p>

<p>“Good-bye, my dear,” I said, and kissed her. “Kiss
my mother and Lucy for me.”</p>

<p>And so I went out into the July night, the clasp of my
sweetheart’s arms and the pressure of her lips fresh in
my mind. I opened the gate and led Captain on to the
broad stretch of turf that runs alongside the highway.
The gate swung to with a little clash as I put foot in
stirrup and leapt into the saddle. “On, Captain, good
horse!” I whispered, and away we shot out into the
darkness like an arrow out of a bow. The hedges and
trees flew by me: I turned in the saddle and saw the
last gleam of the farmhouse lights through the orchard
trees.</p>

<p>How we rode along that night! The great horse
might have known what mission he was upon. I can
still feel the grand sweep of his legs as he went forward,
the regular, smooth movement of his gallop as he tucked
his great thighs under him for every stride. On and
away we went past the Stapleton Woods that skirt the
highway, down the road into Darrington village and up
the hill beyond with hardly a break in the pace, along
the highway past Grove and Castle Laith, on into
Ferrybridge, across the river, and up the long hill past
Brotherton and Byram, and so into the great level plain
that leads to York. A fierce, mad feeling of delight
seemed to come over me as we swept along in that grand
gallop. I laughed and shouted and the horse beneath
me heard and answered with a merry neigh. I sang to
him, praised him, called him many a pet name, leaned
forward and patted his great neck and shoulders, and
promised him such delights as horses care for. And
still on he swept, now stretching away at a raking
gallop, now dropping into a trot, but never abating the
speed that was drawing us nearer and nearer to York.</p>

<p>On, still on! Past Monk Frystone and Sherburn,
through Barkston and Saxton, through Towton and
Stretton, and so into Tadcaster ere yet it was an hour
past midnight. I went steadily through the quiet little
town, fearing lest some enemy should wonder at our
great pace, but once outside we went on again past
Bilbrough and Copmanthorpe until we came to Askham
Bryan. And there I drew rein and pondered on what to
do, for already the morning was beginning to break, and
just before me the towers of the great Minster rose high
in the dim light. I knew not where the Royalist forces
were, nor where the enemy lay, and I feared to fall into
the hands of the latter. But at last I went forward at a
steady trot towards the city, intending, if I were
questioned, to say that I was a farmer riding into
market. And having skirted the city a little I went
in at last through Mickle Gate, having met with no
opposition on that side, and presently drew rein at my
old inn, the Swan, in Pavement. And there came a
great surprise, for I had no sooner leaped from Captain’s
back than I saw Philip Lisle and Jack Drumbleforth
leaning from an upper window in the courtyard, gazing
at me with astonished faces.</p>

<h2>XXV</h2>

<h3>OF THE GREAT FIGHT AT MARSTON MOOR</h3>

<p>I was something more than surprised to see my two
friends staring at me from their upper window, for I had
no idea but that they were hundreds of miles away.
Nevertheless, so heartily glad was I to see them where I
had not expected to meet aught in the shape of friends,
that I immediately called to them in a loud voice,
bidding them come down to me quickly. And so they
were presently at my side in the inn yard, shaking my
hands and asking a hundred questions at once about the
folks at home.</p>

<p>“But what brings thee here, Will?” asked Jack. “Art
come to help us against the King’s enemies? There will
be fighting in these parts ere the day is over, or I am a
false prophet.”</p>

<p>“I have ridden here on important business,” I answered,
and drawing them aside, told them my story. “The
letter,” I said, “is safe in my horse’s saddle. Let us
take him into some stable and get it out.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said Philip, “the city is in our hands and there
is no fear of spying eyes.”</p>

<p>So I took the packet from its hiding-place and handed
it over to Philip, who, having examined it, gave it as his
opinion that it was from the King at Oxford.</p>

<p>“We must lose no time in delivering this,” said he.
“Let us stable your horse, Will, and then find Lord
Newcastle’s lodging. He is like to be in bed at this
hour, but we will wake him quickly enough. Matters
are come to a crisis here, but now this despatch may give
a new turn to affairs.”</p>

<p>On going out again into the streets we found that the
city was beginning to wake. Soldiers were hurrying
about, and the inn yards were noisy with the clank of
armour and the stamping of horses. Men were making
preparations for the day. Here a trooper was repairing
his harness or putting a new edge to his sword; there a
foot soldier was examining his matchlock. To me, who
had never seen aught of war, it looked a strange sight,
that preparation for bloodshed on the fair July morning,
with the peaceful towers of the great Minster looking
down on the quiet city.</p>

<p>When we came to Lord Newcastle’s lodging, we found
that the folks there were already astir, for men, richly
attired, were passing in through the door and
disappearing inside.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said Philip, “the Marquis hath called a council
even at this early hour. See, that is Sir William
Wentworth that is just now entering, and yonder comes Sir
William Langdale. Thy despatch, Will, if it be important,
comes in good time.”</p>

<p>We went into the hall of the house and there awaited
awhile until, Sir William Langdale having entered the
council-room, the doors were closed and a guard stationed
before them.</p>

<p>“They have all arrived,” said Philip; “I had thought
there were more to come. The Marquis likes not
interruptions, but we must make our business known.”</p>

<p>And he spoke to an officer that just then passed across
the hall, and whom he addressed as Colonel Eury.</p>

<p>“A despatch!” said the colonel, holding out his hand.
“Give it to me and I will hand it to the Marquis. He
hath the Prince and various commanders with him, but
if the matter is important—”</p>

<p>“With your pardon, sir,” I said, “I must hand the
packet to Lord Newcastle myself. That I solemnly
promised to the officer that gave it to my care.”</p>

<p>He looked at me for an instant, then nodded and
went into the council-room.</p>

<p>“They will send for thee in, Will,” whispered Jack.
“Hold thy head high and speak up.”</p>

<p>Now, I was not minded to go into the presence of a
prince and of so many noble gentlemen, and would
rather have handed the packet privately to Lord
Newcastle. That, however, was not to be, for presently
Colonel Eury appeared at the door and beckoned me.
He drew me inside the doorway and paused with his
hand on the curtains that shut it out from the room.
Behind the curtains I heard many voices speaking.
“What is your name, friend?” asked the colonel.</p>

<p>“William Dale, sir, a yeoman of Osgoldcross,” I said.</p>

<p>He drew back the curtains and pushed me gently into
the room. I found myself looking at a party of men
seated round a great table, at which one sat with writings
and charts spread out before him. All were richly
attired and fully harnessed, but one sitting at the head
of the table on a slightly raised seat attracted my notice
at once. He was a man of fine presence, with a
handsome face and bright, restless eyes. His hair, long and
dark, fell in great rings over his shoulders. On his
breast were I know not how many crosses and shining
stars, while from his left shoulder a broad band of blue
passed across his breastplate. He looked up as I
entered, and seemed to regard me with astonishment,
for he gazed at me from head to foot and from foot to
head again.</p>

<p>“Whom have we here?” he said.</p>

<p>Another officer, who had been bending over the table
looking at a chart, looked up.</p>

<p>“Ah,” said he, “the messenger you spoke of, Colonel
Eury. Give me the packet, sir.”</p>

<p>I held the packet in my fingers as I looked from one
to another. “The packet, sir,” I said, plucking up
courage, “is for the Marquis of Newcastle, and I
promised to give it into no other hands than his.”</p>

<p>“That is right,” he answered. “I am Lord Newcastle.”</p>

<p>I bowed and gave him the letter. He sat down and
opened it at the table. Before he had broken the last
seal, however, he turned to me again.</p>

<p>“From whom did you receive this, Master Dale?” he
asked.</p>

<p>“From Captain Trevor, sir.”</p>

<p>“He was hurt, I think, and fell by your house?”
“Yes, sir.”</p>

<p>“Where is that?”</p>

<p>“At Dale’s Field, sir, four miles south of Ferrybridge.”</p>

<p>“And you carried this packet straight on to York?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>

<p>He seemed to consider a moment and then broke the
seal. Another packet fell out of the cover, and with it
a sheet of paper which the Marquis took up and read.
Meanwhile the eyes of the officer at the head of the
table were fixed on me.</p>

<p>“I like thy looks, Master Dale,” said he suddenly.
“God’s mercy! why, thou must be six foot four in thy
stockings. Am I right, eh?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” I answered. “Only it is very nearly six
foot five.”</p>

<p>“Ah! a right bred Englishman indeed. Hast thou
fought, then, for his Majesty?”</p>

<p>“No, sir,” I answered. “At least, not as a soldier.”</p>

<p>“And why not as a soldier, with such thew and sinew
as thine?”</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” I answered reluctantly, “I have an old
mother and a young sister at home, and there is none to
protect them if I went fighting. Nevertheless—”</p>

<p>“Well, nevertheless—go on, man.”</p>

<p>“I should like to fight well enough,” I said boldly.</p>

<p>“Ha! I believe you, Master Dale. You look— Well,
Marquis, what do you read there?”</p>

<p>“Little, sir, that concerns myself. This packet
encloses a second one, which I am commanded to
forward to your Royal Highness.”</p>

<p>“Ah! from his Majesty,” said the Prince, and took the
packet. “’Tis from the King at Oxford. Your pardon,
gentlemen, while I read.”</p>

<p>He opened the cover, and taking out the enclosure,
bent over it.</p>

<p>Colonel Eury, who had remained at my elbow,
touched me on the arm. “You can withdraw now,” he
whispered.</p>

<p>I turned to go, but the Prince stayed me.</p>

<p>“Wait awhile, Master Dale,” he said: “I want thee
presently.”</p>

<p>So I remained there while the Prince read his letter.
Very soon he crushed the sheet together and turned to
the officers around him.</p>

<p>“Now, gentlemen,” said he, “let us resume. I have
here news from his Majesty which will bear weight.
But, first, Marquis, tell us what you think. Do we fight
or not?”</p>

<p>“I have already said, sir, that in my opinion it is not
well for us to attempt anything yet upon the enemy. I
hear there is some division amongst the generals of the
Parliamentary forces, and prospect of their separation in
a day or two. Again, in two days from now, Colonel
Clavering will come in here from the north with three
thousand men, and two thousand more are on their way
from various garrisons. Will it not be well to wait for
this reinforcement?”</p>

<p>The other officers uttered murmurs of approval at this,
nodding their heads as if in echo of Lord Newcastle’s
words.</p>

<p>“You think that wise counsel, gentlemen? Now,
I have here positive and direct command from his
Majesty to fight. We cannot go against that. Yes, to
fight the enemy at once. So fight we must.”</p>

<p>There was a brief silence after the Prince had spoken.
Then the Marquis of Newcastle spoke again.</p>

<p>“I am ready and willing, sir,” said he, “to obey your
Highness as I would obey his Majesty, for I have no
other desire than to do my duty as a loyal subject.
What your Highness decides upon shall be done.”</p>

<p>“Then I decide for fighting,” said the Prince. “Nay,
’tis his Majesty that decides. Gentlemen, I doubt not
we shall gain a glorious victory. And now let us to our
duties.”</p>

<p>He rose from his chair as he spoke, and the others
rising with him, fell into small groups and presently
passed out talking one with another. The Marquis
of Newcastle came across the chambers with bent head
and grave face. He caught sight of me and paused.</p>

<p>“I have not forgotten you,” he said. “You shall be
rewarded for your pains in bringing the packet.”</p>

<p>“Nay, my lord,” I said. “I want naught. I did it to
serve the King.”</p>

<p>“I thank you, Master Dale,” he said, and passed out.</p>

<p>The Prince stood talking to the officer at the table,
who was rolling up his maps and papers.</p>

<p>“Ah, farmer,” he said, suddenly breaking off his
conversation, and advancing to me, “let me see—will
you fight for the King to-day? It will be a great
victory—come, man, share the glory.”</p>

<p>“I will, sir, if— There are two friends of mine
outside that are serving under your Highness. If I
could be with them perhaps I should learn something of
the manner.”</p>

<p>“And who are they?” he asked.</p>

<p>“Philip Lisle, your Highness, and John Drumbleforth.”</p>

<p>“Ah—I know them both. Well, William, get thee to
Philip Lisle and tell him to take charge of thee, and I
shall see thee strike a worthy blow to-day. God’s mercy!
we cannot spare stuff like thee at this time.”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” I said, and hurried out to tell Philip and
Jack what had passed. I was eager to fly at the enemy,
but Philip, when I told him what Lord Newcastle had
advised, seemed grave and anxious.</p>

<p>“He is sage and wary in war,” said he, “and Prince
Rupert is fiery and headstrong. However the die is
cast. Yet there would have been no harm in waiting
for a day or two, for the five thousand extra troops
would have meant much to us. And now let us see
about finding you some harness, Will.”</p>

<p>“It shall go hard to-day,” said Jack, “if we three do
not split some Roundhead skulls. Hah! I would give a
good deal to win a great victory to-day.”</p>

<p>There were a great many volunteers in the Prince’s
army, men who like myself were farmers and yeomen,
and who were minded to fight for the King, and it was
to one of these companies that Philip Lisle and Jack
Drumbleforth belonged. Presently, therefore, they took
me to their headquarters and fitted me out with sword
and breastplate, and with a great hat which had a gay
plume in it, and this done we gave Captain an extra
feed of corn so that he might be in good fettle, and the
morning being then advanced, we went to such breakfast
as we could get. This, indeed, was not stinted, for,
despite the siege, provisions in York were plentiful, full
preparation having been made by the beleaguered army
before the investment closed in.</p>

<p>Now, the novelty of my position and the pride called
up in me—naturally, as I think—by Prince Rupert’s
admiration of my great figure, conspired to put away
from my mind all thoughts of anything but the matter
in hand. It never occurred to me that if I fell there
would be a pretty to-do at Dale’s Field. Nay, the
thought of falling in the fight never occurred to me at
all. I was young and strong and could hardly understand
anyone overcoming me. All I wanted was to get
used to the swing of the long sword they had given me,
and then to carve some record with it on the bodies of
the rebels.</p>

<p>All that morning we stood to arms in readiness for
the word of command. Bugles and trumpets were
blowing all over the city; every few minutes some
hurried horse and its rider came through one or other
of the city gates with news of the enemy. Men posted
on the great tower of the Minster observed their
movements and sent down reports. And at last, just before
noon was striking from the city clocks, the word was
given, and our army moved away through the gates in
the direction of Marston.</p>

<p>It was a wonderful and a striking sight to see that
army, the flower of the gallantry and loyalty of
England, go out across the smiling land to fight. There
were fourteen thousand foot and nine thousand horse,
with twenty-five pieces of ordnance. The Prince led on
the right wing of horse, which had in it twelve divisions,
consisting of one hundred troops of fifty men each. Sir
Charles Lucas and Colonel Hurry were in command of
the left wing, and Generals Tilyard and Goring, with
Major-General Bute and the Marquis of Newcastle, led
on the main body. We passed over the ferry at
Poppleton and came on to the moor, from which the rebels at
our approach hastily withdrew, so that we possessed
ourselves of the greater part of the moor, and finally formed
a long line extending from Marston village to Tockwith,
the enemy meanwhile drawing up his force against us.
Then those with me began to point out to me certain
notable regiments of the Parliamentary army, such as that
of General Cromwell, whose Ironsides were posted on the
left wing, along with the regiment of Lord Manchester
and the Scotch Horse. Upon these men, whose prowess
had reached every one’s ears by that time, I gazed with
much interest, wondering how we should fare against
them.</p>

<p>Now, by three o’clock both armies were fully formed
for the battle, and there was general expectancy amongst
all of us. Presently the great ordnance began to play
on both sides; but these monstrous cannon did little
damage beyond driving up clouds of dust and soil, and
before five o’clock they had ceased firing, following
which there was a long interval, neither party caring to
begin the attack, for between the two armies there was
a deep ditch, which was equally disliked of both. It did
seem, indeed, that we were to have no fighting that day,
but at seven o’clock we saw Lord Manchester’s foot ad-
vancing across the ditch, followed by the main body of
the Parliamentary army, and so the battle began in dead
earnest.</p>

<h2>XXVI</h2>

<h3>OF THE PROGRESS OF THE FIGHT</h3>

<p>I do not suppose it possible for any man who has not
actually seen bloodshed and war to form a proper
understanding of what happens when two armies meet to give
each other battle. Never, indeed, could I have believed
that war was one half so awful as I found it when, the
signal having been given, the royal army and its enemy
closed and men strove like furies to kill and slay on
every side. The roar of the ordnance, the shouting of
the commanders, the continual babel of shrieks, shouts,
exclamations, and oaths which filled the air, mingled
with the groans and sobs of the wounded and dying,
made an impression upon me which nothing has ever
effaced. Add to this the sights which presently met
one’s eyes at every turn: blood flowing like water; here
a man writhing in agony on the ground, there another
just falling from his horse as the sword-thrust of his
antagonist transfixed him; yonder, horses and men
rolling in awful confusion together; in front, a comrade
struck down in the very act of shouting defiance to the
foe; behind, another falling as he encouraged his fellows
to come on—such were the horrors that I saw around
me ere the fight had raged half an hour.</p>

<p>Our company was in the first division of Prince
Rupert’s Horse, and made a fine show, every man being
well equipped and mounted, and apparently eager and
anxious to fight. I sat between Jack Drumbleforth and
Philip Lisle, being largely dependent upon them for
guidance in nice matters of wheeling and turning. My
horse, Captain, comprehended, I think, the nature of
our business, for he neighed and snuffed the wind, and
pawed impatiently at the ground. As the shouting of
the main body of the Roundheads, led by Lord
Manchester, came along to us on the wind, he tugged
impatiently at his bridle.</p>

<p>“We shall soon be at it now,’ said Jack, on my right.
“Keep a firm bridle and a loose sword-arm, Will, until
you are close in, and then let them have it, weight and
all.”</p>

<p>Prince Rupert, his eyes flashing as he dashed forward,
came sweeping along our line on his great war-horse.
Right over against us were posted General Cromwell’s
division of three hundred horse, looking like figures cut
out of bronze and just as rock-like. We were to charge
against these in front and flank, and the Prince was to
lead us himself. The words of command came short
and sharp, and with a great cry of “God and the King!”
we were galloping over the rough ground in a rattling
mass of steel and iron that flashed and clanked in the
bright sunlight. The great sword in my hand felt like
a switch. The fast pace intoxicated me, a red mist
sprang up before my eyes; I had no other desire but to
kill, and kill, and kill again.</p>

<p>“Steady, Will, steady!” said Jack. “Now for the
crush!” and the two wings met with a sound that echoed
and tingled in my ears. But above it all I heard the
cry of the Parliamentarians, “God with us!”</p>

<p>I could no more tell you of what happened in that
first few moments than I could describe the battle of
Creçy. It was all confusion and tumult to me. Shouts,
screams, groans, yells of pain and fierce oaths as a sword
went home, the neighing of frightened horses and loud
commands of the officers, made up an indescribable
noise. When I came to my full senses I suddenly found
myself as cool as if I were riding about in my own fields.
I was slashing and stabbing and guarding with the rest
of them, Jack at my right working away like a Trojan,
while Philip Lisle on the left was fighting warily and
coolly. Again and again we dashed on the front rank of
the Ironsides, striving to break through them, but
without success. They stood firm as a rock, giving thrust
for thrust and cut for cut, and every now and then
shouting out their battle-cry, “God with us!”</p>

<p>They are like rocks,” said Jack, breathless, as we
drew together to dash at them once more. “Like rocks
of iron.”</p>

<p>The Prince, reckless and brave as a lion, was here and
there in front and flank, encouraging and prompting his
men. Beyond the Ironsides I saw a remarkable-looking
man mounted on a hardy horse, very plainly accoutred,
who gave his directions in a cool voice, as if knowing
well how they would be obeyed. “See yonder, that’s
Cromwell!” cried Jack, pointing to this man, and I
looked again with wonder at the famous general. And
then the two bodies closed once more, and once more we
fought desperately to break the enemy’s line. The
fighting became looser; the steady phalanx broke up
on each side, and cutting and slashing became general.
The Ironsides began to ride at us instead of allowing us
to ride at them. A great trooper rode headlong at me,
shouting his battle-cry and poising his long keen blade
to cut me off for ever. All my strength seemed to go
into my arm and shoulder as I rose at him. My sword
came down over his like a thunderbolt and shore its way
through helmet and cap and head, while his own fell
from his hand and rattled with him to the ground,
where he lay a grim corpse and the tide of war rolled
over him.</p>

<p>“Well struck, Will!” shouted Jack, who was parrying
and thrusting on his own behalf. “A great blow. Ah,
sir, your lunge was too low.”</p>

<p>His sword went straight through a man’s breast and
came out behind. The trooper threw up his arms and
would have fallen, but the sword, firmly fixed, held him
up, let Jack tug at it as he would. Another trooper rode
up to cut Jack down, thinking him defenceless. I
reached over and hit him so true and full on the
breastpiece with my sword that he tumbled over his horse’s
crupper and lay kicking on the ground, while Jack tore
his sword away from his antagonist, whose body
immediately sank and was trampled into shapelessness by the
hurrying crowd that pressed over it.</p>

<p>But the Ironsides, cool and intrepid, were breaking
our ranks. Fast as a man fell another closed in, and
their grim shout waxed more and more triumphant. A
great gap opened in our midst, and they poured in
amongst us, slashing and stabbing with terrible
earnestness. A touch like lightning ran along my arm from
shoulder to elbow, and I felt the hot blood run down it
and saw it come trickling across the wrist. Jack at the
same moment had his cheek cut open nearly from eye to
mouth. But neither his opponent nor mine lived to
make another stroke, for we cut them down ere ever
they could raise their swords a second time. And yet
the Ironsides swept on, and let Prince Rupert entreat
and command as he would, he was powerless to stop the
splendid work of those grim troopers, who did their work
in silence, save when they opened their lips to shout
forth the cry of “God with us!”</p>

<p>“We are beaten!” cried Philip Lisle. “See, Manchester
has broken through our foot and is pursuing
them. Confusion! we shall lose the day without doubt.”</p>

<p>“Look out, look out!” said Jack. “The Ironsides are
on us again in new force. They ride like a whirlwind.”</p>

<p>And like a whirlwind they did ride, destroying all that
came in their way. Flanked by the Scotch Horse under
General Leslie, they rode through us, sweeping our
companies away like chaff before the storm. Many
men lost heart and turned and fled before that awful
onslaught. For myself, I felt my heart like to burst
with grief and rage, and would have ridden amongst
the enemy to kill some half-dozen of them before I was
killed myself, but Jack seized my bridle and steered his
horse and mine through the mass of our own men, who
had turned tail and were flying towards York.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis all over there, man!” he cried, as I strove to
detach my reins from his grasp. “Let us where we
shall be of some use. See, our left wing hath put the
enemy to flight.”</p>

<p>And, indeed, what had happened to our right wing
was equally happening to the enemy’s right, for Colonel
Hurry had prevailed against them. At the beginning
of the fight the Parliamentary troops under Sir Thomas
Fairfax and Colonel Lambert were defeated, though Sir
Thomas himself had fought his way with five or six
troops through the Royalist army to his own left. And
the brigade under Lord Fairfax, having given way, was
further hampered by the cowardice of some newly-raised
regiments under Sir Thomas, which, being panic-stricken,
turned and fled in confusion on the troops in their rear,
whom they threw into disorder and trampled underfoot.
The right wing of the rebels thereupon broke up and
fled for miles across country in the direction of
Tadcaster and Cawood, crying as they went that all was
lost. And so infectious was this panic that the other
Parliamentary troops under Generals Manchester, Lever,
and Fairfax gave way also, and were preparing to quit
the field, when a sudden turn of fortune changed matters
altogether.</p>

<p>For while our left wing was sweeping away the
Parliamentary right, Cromwell came back from his pursuit
of our right, and seeing the state of affairs, made haste
to repair the damage. Sir Thomas Fairfax at the same
moment rallied his horse, and Manchester’s foot,
returning from the chase of our troopers, got into order
with the other two divisions and came on again to attack our
left wing, which by that time had pursued the Parliamentary
right as far as the baggage waggons. So here
was the battle to be fought over again, just when each
side thought it won, our left having been victorious
while our right was defeated, and the same thing having
happened to the other side.</p>

<p>Now, Philip and Jack and I had wheeled away with
several others when the Ironsides broke our ranks, and
had gone over to our victorious left, so that when the
rebels under Cromwell and Fairfax came on again to
meet us, we fell in with a troop of horse and prepared
to contest the matter once more. A fierce and terrible
contest it would doubtless be, though there could hardly
be more bloodshed, I thought, than had already taken
place. For as we rode across the field, it was indeed
pitiable to see the sights which met our eyes in every
direction. Roundhead and Cavalier alike lay on the
ground, dying or dead. Here a poor wretch implored
us as we passed to dismount and put him out of his
misery; there another with eyes starting from their
sockets begged us to find him a drink of water. The
dead lay in heaps in some places where the charge had
been thickest.</p>

<p>Here and there the ground was literally torn up as
if by the plough, and a hedge of dead and wounded
on each side bore witness to where the cavalry had
charged along and carried all before them. Horses,
riderless, were galloping over the moor, some towards
York and some towards Tadcaster, while others, apparently
unconscious of the dreadful surroundings, cropped
the herbage where it had not been trampled into waste.
Over the whole field a mist of smoke seemed to hang,
and far away in the twilight the great towers of York
Minster rose towards heaven as if in witness against the
scenes of violence on earth.</p>

<p>Neither Philip nor Jack nor I had come through the
earlier part of the fight unscathed, for my arm was cut
in a nasty manner and bled more than I liked, and
Jack’s face was covered with blood from the wound in
his cheek, while Philip had received a slash across the
thick part of his sword-arm, which was fortunately not
deep in extent. Nevertheless we went into the fight
again side by side, resolved to do what lay in us to win
the day for the King.</p>

<p>Now, that fight in the fast-falling shadows was twice
more fierce and bloody than even the hot business of
the afternoon had been. Our men fought well and
bravely; yea, as the Prince himself said next day, no
army could have fought more bravely. Many a time
did we make ground and gain an advantageous position,
only to be swept away again by these grim Ironsides,
who rode on us to kill and slay without mercy, shouting
their cry of “God with us!” For three hours the fortunes
of the fight hung in the balance, but the superior tactics
of the Parliamentary generals and the invincible powers
of the troopers under Cromwell carried the day at last.
There was no withstanding the onslaught of these men,
who rode together like a wall and swept away whatever
opposed itself to them.</p>

<p>And so as the darkness came on the King’s troops
broke into hopeless confusion and fled away towards
York, and the battle was over and we had lost. Philip
and Jack and I were together till the end, and fought,
I think, to the last. We spoke little as we rode into
York that night, for we were dead beaten and our hearts
were low within us. We had ridden out in the morning
confident in our cause and hopeful of victory, and our
cause was now in a worse state than ever, and victory
was with the Parliamentarians. We had lost thousands
of men, and the field looked more like a butcher’s
shambles than the peaceful fields of England. Sir
William Wentworth was slain, and with him Sir William
Langdale, Sir Thomas Metham, Sir William Lambton,
Colonel Eury, and Colonel Slingsby. Sir Charles Lucas,
general of Lord Newcastle’s horse, was a prisoner, and
Generals Porter and Tilyard, with nearly three thousand
rank and file, were in the hands of the enemy, who had
also secured twenty-five pieces of ordnance, a hundred
and thirty barrels of powder, and several thousand
arms. It was a defeat signal and undoubted.</p>

<p>The next morning there were rumours of a strange
nature in York. It was said that Lord Newcastle and
his friends, dissatisfied with Prince Rupert’s conduct,
had resolved to leave the country and abandon all
further part in the war. Nor was this rumour
unfounded, for presently the Marquis set out for
Scarborough, being conducted thither by a troop of horse,
and accompanied by a distinguished company of officers
and gentlemen who sailed with him from that port for
Hamburg. It was sixteen years ere Lord Newcastle
came into the land again, and then the Commonwealth
was over and Charles the Second had come to the throne.
As for Prince Rupert, he too immediately summoned
what force he could and marched out of York to the
northward, where at twelve miles’ distance from the city
he awaited the coming of Colonel Clavering and his
three thousand men, and with them went away into
Lancashire. In this way York was abandoned to the
care of its own loyal citizens, who continued to defend
it against the Parliamentary army.</p>

<p>Now, I knew not what to do when Philip and Jack
announced their intention of following Prince Rupert,
but after some thought I decided to return home. The
harvest was coming on, and it behoved me to attend
to my own business. So I took a regretful farewell of
my two friends and rode away through the gates southward,
hoping to get home without let or question of any
man. But in this hope I was wrong, for I had not
ridden two miles out of the city, when I was seized by a
troop of Cromwell’s Ironsides, who, in spite of all my
remonstrances, carried me with them to the besiegers’
camp, and there put me into safe keeping.</p>

<h2>XXVII</h2>

<h3>OF MY MEETING WITH GENERAL CROMWELL</h3>

<p>The troopers into whose hands I had fallen were some
twelve or fourteen in number, all of them sturdy fellows
of the same type that I had seen so much of on the
previous day. They were well mounted on strong
serviceable horses, and had evidently been into the
outlying villages in pursuit of fodder, for each man had
a bundle of hay hanging from his saddle, while behind
them came a peasant leading a load of straw, which was
guarded on either side by more troopers.
“ ’Tis rather hard treatment, masters,” I said when they
told me that I must go with them as a prisoner, “that
you should thus arrest me who am going home to my
farm twenty miles away with no other thought than of
getting my harvest. Surely you do not war with
peaceable folk.”</p>

<p>“No, marry,” said one who rode by my side, “you are
right there, and it would best please us not to war with
anyone. But if I mistake not, friend, you yourself
were fighting yesterday at Marston field. A man of
your inches is not easily lost sight of nor forgotten.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” chimed in another, “ ’twas you, master, that
slew Job Trotter. A great blow, that clove him through
chin and chine.”</p>

<p>“If I had not slain him he would have slain me,” I
answered.</p>

<p>“True, true,” said an old, grayheaded trooper. “We
say naught, friend, against you on that score. God
knows ’tis much pity that Englishmen should be killing
Englishmen at this time. However, so it is, and
prisoners we must make of our enemies whenever we
can, for our own sake and defence.”</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” I said, “I am no man’s enemy, I hope,
save where there is need that I should be, and I am
quite sure that if I cut one of you in two presently I
should be ready to shake his hand afterward. ’Tis true
I was fighting yesterday, but what then? I am loyal
to the King, having never been taught any different. I
hope I am not to be blamed for doing my duty.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” he answered, “I blame no man for doing his
duty, for what is to blame in a man is not doing it.”</p>

<p>Conversing in this manner, we drew near to the
Parliamentarian camp on the south-west side of York,
which city they were still besieging, and did continue
to besiege for fourteen days more. I was somewhat
concerned about being captured in this manner, for I
did not know how long I might be kept prisoner, and
was already anxious about my affairs at home. I quieted
myself, however, by reflecting that harvest could not
possibly begin for another three weeks, by which time
all manner of things might happen. I was very certain
of one thing, namely, that if the Roundheads meant to
keep me prisoner they would have to watch me as
closely as a cat watches a mouse. I was not used to
having my liberty curtailed, and it galled me sorely to
think that I was not able to turn my horse’s head in
which direction I pleased.</p>

<p>We passed through the camp to a sort of fort from
which the Parliamentarians were discharging some of
their ordnance against the city walls. Here I was
ordered to dismount, and Captain was taken away from
me, at which sight I was exceeding sorrowful and vexed,
because he was something more than a good horse, and
I had given a good round sum rather than lose him.
There was no help for it, however, for I had chosen to
go a-fighting and must now abide by the fortunes of
war; nevertheless I begged them to treat my beast with
respect, because he had done no wrong, whatever his
master had been unfortunate enough to do. I sat down
sadly enough when they had led him away, and for a
while did naught but stare at the ground under my nose,
wishing that I was back at Dale’s Field. There were
other prisoners near me, captured, I suppose, on the
previous evening, and we were all under guard, but I
spoke to none of them, not feeling at that time much
disposed for conversation.</p>

<p>Ihad sat for some time in this way, thinking about
Dale’s Field and wondering if Timothy Grass had gotten
the haystacks properly thatched, and whether the sheep
had been turned into the twelve-acre as I had given
orders they should be, when the shadow of a man fell
right before me and rested there. I looked up and saw
standing before me a tall, stout-built man in a somewhat
faded doublet, who stood with hands behind him staring
at me. He was naught particular to look upon, for his
face was coarse and red, and his nose somewhat
bottle-shaped, and upon his forehead there was a wart which
gave him a strange appearance. Moreover, there were
blotches and pimples all over his cheeks, and the hair
of his beard and face grew in patches and tufts more
than in regular fashion, so that he had naught of
personal beauty to recommend him. But there was
that about him which made me return his staring looks
with interest, for he was surely the most remarkable
man that I had ever set eyes on. Whether it was his
entire bearing, or the set of his square mouth and chin,
or the keen glance of his eye that made me wonder, I
cannot tell, being no scholar in these matters; but this
I do know: he was a man whom no one could have
looked at without wonder and admiration, for he was
like what one fancies a king to be, namely, a master
and leader of his people.</p>

<p>“Well, friend,” said he, “what do you think of?”</p>

<p>His voice was somewhat harsh and rough, but not
unkindly. I looked again at him and saw that he was
measuring my height and breadth, which, indeed, were
matters that all strangers were astonished at.</p>

<p>“Sir,” I answered, “I was at that moment wondering
if the folks at home have finished thatching our
haystack, and if they have turned the sheep into a
certain field.”</p>

<p>“Peaceable thoughts,” said he, and looked away across
the camp towards Marston. “Yea, peaceable thoughts.
Then you are a farmer?”</p>

<p>“A yeoman, sir.”</p>

<p>“Ayeoman, and a follower of the King? You were
fighting in Rupert’s army yesterday.”</p>

<p>“Why, sir, “I said, “surely I have as much right to
fight for the King as you have to fight against him. I
never knew otherwise than that men were to obey the
King, as indeed it saith in Holy Scripture.”</p>

<p>“Yea, yea,” he answered, still staring at me. “I doubt
not he hath followers of your sort. ’Tis your misfortune,
master farmer, that you know no better.”</p>

<p>“I have heard men say,” I answered, “that liberty was
impossible to Englishmen while the King reigned, but
I never could believe that, because I have always had
my own until now, and once when Nicholas Pratt
wrongly imprisoned me in his cellar. Besides, what is
a king for, if we are not to obey him?”</p>

<p>“The King, friend, should be the high minister of the
people—not a tyrant nor an abuser of the nation’s laws.
If you are a true Englishman you should know that.”</p>

<p>“I am a true Englishman enough, sir,” I answered.
“Otherwise I should not be here.”</p>

<p>“How came you here, then?”</p>

<p>Now, I knew by that time who the man was, for I
recognised him as the great leader I had seen
yesterday—Oliver Cromwell himself. And knowing this, I
did not like to tell him how it was that I had come to
York on the previous day, fearing that if I did so I should
reveal some State secret or other and injure the King.</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” I said, “I was brought in by the soldiers,
a prisoner.”</p>

<p>“Yea, because you are an enemy, and therefore to be
taken care of. But how came you here, and fighting
against us yesterday, if you are so anxious about those
hayricks at home?”</p>

<p>“Sir,” I said, “I am a plain man and know naught of
politics, only what I am told by my betters. I was
fighting here yesterday because I chanced to be yonder
in York and was pressed into service, whereby I got this
cut on my left arm and lost some blood.”</p>

<p>“And slew certain of my troopers. Well, farmer, it
would have been best for you to stay at home, and
meddle not in these matters. And as to fighting for the
King, why, man, you are fighting against your own
liberties. Man, man, do you know what this England
of ours will be when this is past? A fair land flowing
with the milk and honey of peace, wherein every man
shall have right and justice, and the poor shall no more
be oppressed. And yet ye will set your faces against all
that.”</p>

<p>He was walking up and down before me as he spoke,
his face twitching as if under some strong emotion, and
his hands restlessly clasping and unclasping themselves
behind his back. His eyes were fixed on the ground,
but there was such a far-away look in them that I do
not think he saw the daisies at his feet.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he went on, “but there will be much tribulation
first. Englishmen slaying Englishmen when they should
have smitten hands in friendship. How long, how long?
And even for us that were ordained to this mission there
is bitter grief and travail. Mine own lad, and now my
brother’s son; why then, and not only ours, but many
another man’s children. Naught but blood, blood,
wherever one turns! “</p>

<p>He was now standing still, with his face turned
towards the city and his back to me, and I felt quite
sure that he had entirely forgotten my presence, and
was communing with himself. Presently, however, he
turned on me again, and spoke once more.</p>

<p>“You have been in York this morning, friend. How
fare they there? I hear that Newcastle hath ridden
away and left them, and that Rupert is on his way
northward again. So do the rats leave the sinking
ship.”</p>

<p>“Sir,” I said, “I do not know how they fare in York,
and if I did I should not tell you. You would think
poorly of me if I were to betray my own friends.
Whether my side be wrong or right, I must cleave to
it now.”</p>

<p>He looked at me for a moment, and then walked away,
his head bending forward over his breast, as if he were
debating some great matter within himself, and so
passed out of sight amongst the tents. A young
gentleman who had lingered near now approached me, and
entered into conversation. He was attired in the
uniform of a King’s officer, and seemed highly
disconsolate at finding himself a prisoner in the
Parliamentary camp.</p>

<p>“You have been talking to Cromwell,” said he. “ ’Tis
a strange man, and one that I cannot understand. Do
you think, friend, that he hath his senses in full
possession? Have not these troubles somewhat turned
his brain?”</p>

<p>“Why, sir, “I answered, “so far as I can judge of him
his brain must be a deal sounder than most men’s are.
I did not see him lose his head in the fight yesterday,
and he talks sensibly enough, to my mind.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a great and wonderful man,” said the young
gentleman. “A man I begin to think, such as England
hath not seen this long time. But see now, only last
night, as I lay trying to sleep near yonder
baggage-waggon, I saw him walking up and down, for his tent
was near me, and he muttered and talked to himself like
one possessed. Yea, and once I did hear him sigh
sadly, like one in great sorrow, whereas he ought to
have rejoiced over his victory. But what think you of
these Roundheads?”</p>

<p>“They have only just laid hands upon me, sir,” I said,
“and I therefore cannot say. They seem decent men,
grave and sober, and rare soldiers.”</p>

<p>“I tell thee what it is, friend,” said the young officer,
“these men will never be beaten. There is no rioting
and drinking in the camp after a victory, as there would
have been in ours. Indeed, they think of naught else
but pursuit of arms and sober talk about drill and
tactics and such-like. Yea, and you could see how they
fought yesterday. Specially raised and trained and
drilled they all are, and General Cromwell moves them all
like one piece. The King hath no such soldiers as these.
Is it true, friend, that Prince Rupert has gone northwards?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir,” I answered; “he marched away before
noon, and Lord Newcastle hath gone to Scarborough
with his friends, where he will take ship for the
Continent.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said he. “If only Rupert had taken Newcastle’s
advice yesterday! The Prince is brave as a
lion, but he hath no judgment. They say he received
a despatch from the King early yesterday morning,
bidding him engage the enemy, but he showed it to
none of the commanders. I wonder what these
Roundheads will do with us now. ’Tis poor work being
taken prisoner. I had as lief be killed and done with.”</p>

<p>That, however, was not quite to my own liking,
because a prisoner always has some chance of escape.
As the night drew near I began to cast about me for
some means of regaining my liberty, but saw none, for
we were closely surrounded by guards, and I perceived
no way of getting at my horse, Captain, without whom I
was not minded to stir a foot.So, as it grew to dusk,
I made myself comfortable against a truss of hay, and
fell asleep, my rest not even being disturbed by the
noise of an occasional discharge of the ordnance, which
now and then fired a shot into the city. I know not
how long I had slumbered in this manner, when one of
the troopers who had brought me in awoke me by
shaking my arm, and bade me follow him. I went after
him towards a tent, from the door of which a light
shone, given out by a lamp placed on a table, at which
sat General Cromwell and another officer, whom I did
not know then, but afterwards came to know well
enough as Sir Thomas Fairfax. The latter was engaged
in sealing a packet, and did not look up as I entered.</p>

<p>“Master farmer,” said Cromwell, “you would like to
get back to that hayrick you spoke of. Will you take a
letter to Sir Richard Lowther at Pontefract Castle, and
so get your liberty, and go home?”</p>

<p>“If it be not against the King, sir,” I answered.</p>

<p>“I dare say the King is not mentioned in it,” said he.
“ ’Tis a private letter from Sir Thomas here.”</p>

<p>“Will you deliver it faithfully, friend?” asked the
other officer, glancing hard at me. “You look trusty, I
think.”</p>

<p>“I will ride straight to the Castle with it, sir, if you
will give me my own horse again,” I said, and held out
my hand for the packet.</p>

<p>“Give him his horse,” said Cromwell, “and see him
out of the camp.”</p>

<p>He followed me to the curtain of the tent. “Go home,
lad,” said he; “go home, and do not come a-fighting
again. The only son of thy mother, and she a widow!
Go home, go home; there are enow of us that have lost
children already.”</p>

<p>He pushed me out into the darkness, and, dropping
the curtain, went inside the tent again, and left me
wondering.</p>

<h2>XXVIII</h2>

<h3>OF MY ADVENTURE AT THE WAYSIDE INN</h3>

<p>I was exceedingly well pleased to regain my liberty on
such easy terms, and said so to the trooper who
conducted me outside the camp, and who was the same
grayheaded man that had brought me in earlier in the
day. Also I was somewhat interested at the behaviour
towards me of General Cromwell, whom I had previously
imagined to be more likely to hang me from the nearest
tree than to send me home again to my hayricks.</p>

<p>“You doubtless gained his favour, Master Dale,” said
the old trooper, “by telling him that you had as much
right to fight for the King as he had to fight against
him. He liketh plain speaking, doth Master Oliver,
whether it is in his own way or not. But it is not with
such as you that our quarrel is. I dare say you do
honestly fight for the King, knowing no better, and
believing you do your duty thereby. Against that I
have naught to say. But there are those about the
King and in his army who do corrupt him with evil
counsels, loving not the liberty and advantage of the
nation, but rather thinking of their own selfish ends,
and it is with these that our quarrel lies. Yea, and will
lie until God hath swept them away from the face of the
earth, and England is free again. And now, lad, you
are outside the camp and can go without let or question,
and so fare you well.”</p>

<p>In this way I took leave of the enemy, and rode away
through Askham Bryan towards Tadcaster, glad enough
to be free to go after my own affairs. My head was
very full of my late adventures as I rode along. It was
only forty-eight hours since I had left home, and yet I
had seen in that time more than ever I had seen in all
the previous years of my life. I had carried a despatch
from the King to Prince Rupert and had heard a council
held between the Prince and his generals, I had gone
into battle and slain more than one man and got
wounded myself, and I had been taken prisoner and had
held parley with General Cromwell. Here was enough
to make one think deeply, and I wondered what the
people at home would say to it. Somehow it seemed a
long, long time since I saw the farmhouse lights and the
faces of those I loved. A whole age seemed to have
gone by since I had ridden away on that errand to York.
I wondered if the wounded officer still lay at our house,
and if all had gone well since I left. I had seen
enough of war to make me satisfied, and I resolved as
we sped homewards that in future I should stay where
my duty required me to be rather than go forth to seek
adventures. And yet I should have done the same
thing again under similar circumstances. The villages
along the roadside were busy enough even at that late
hour of the evening. Fugitives of the Royalist army
had fled or crept along the highway all day long,
wounded and weary, and were filling the inns by which
I passed. The road itself was thronged with carts and
waggons filled with wounded men, going I know not
whither. For the first few miles I was stopped more
than once by Roundhead soldiers, who let me go on at
once on seeing a passport I had received from General
Cromwell. Of Royalist troops I saw none; they were
apparently dispersed in other directions.</p>

<p>When I came to Aberford I determined to take the
road which runs through Castleford, rather than follow
the usual route to Brotherton and Ferrybridge. This I
decided upon for two reasons: first, the road through
Castleford would take me in an almost straight line to
Pontefract; and, second, it would probably be not so
thronged as the other highway. So I went on and made
good progress for a while, but before I had come to
Kippax, Captain suddenly went dead lame and hobbled
so sorely that I was forced to dismount and lead him by
the bridle. Poor beast, he had gone through some sorely
trying work since leaving home, and in addition to it had
received a slight wound in his left shoulder from a
pike-thrust aimed at him by one of the Roundhead foot. It
was a most unfortunate matter, however, that he should
fail me at this juncture, for I was then but five miles
from Pontefract and eight from home, and should have
been at Dale’s Field in two hours if all had gone well.</p>

<p>There was nothing for it but to give Captain a rest,
and I accordingly led him a little way further, to where
the wayside inn stands at the four cross-roads beyond
Kippax. That is a lonely house and hath no other
cottage near it for some distance; indeed, the landlord
there gets little custom, save from those who pass along
that way, going from York to Castleford, or from Leeds
to Selby, such being farmers and drovers with herds of
sheep or cattle. The host at that time was one John
Sanderson, a Pontefract man by birth, and a right good
man for such a place, being brave and honest, as wayside
landlords should be, for they have many dangers to
confront, and more temptations to withstand than their
fellows who live in towns or villages.</p>

<p>Honest John, when I went into the kitchen, was
drinking his own health before the fire, which was not
an unwelcome sight even in July, for the night was
somewhat chilly. There was another man seated on the
long settle whom I did not know, but who seemed from
his appearance to be a cattle-drover that had put up
there for the night.</p>

<p>“God save us, Master Dale!’ said John Sanderson.
“Is it really you, and what are you doing here at this
time o’ night? Surely not from York market in these
troublous times? Dear heart, the sight of wounded
men that we have seen this day! and ’tis said that on the
Sherburn road they be twice as thick.”</p>

<p>“Ten times as thick, John, and that is why I chose
this road. But hark ye, John, my horse has gone dead
lame and can go no further. ’Tis a great pity, for I
would gladly have got home as quick as may be.”</p>

<p>“Let me see him,” said John, and followed me into the
yard. “ ’Tis not the best of times to put a horse into our
stables, Master Will,” he continued, when we were clear
of the house, “for there are all sorts of folks about, and
my wits are that moydered that I know not how to keep
an eye on right and left. Ah, I see it is Captain, that
you bought from the Wakefield corn-miller, and a good
horse ’tis. So ho, my lad, stand over! Yes, lame
indeed, but an hour or two’s rest, Master Will, an hour
or two’s rest, you see—why, ’twill put him to rights, I
warrant.”</p>

<p>“But if your stables are not safe, John? And, hark
you, I would not now lose Captain for a hundred pounds,
for he hath been in battle and behaved himself like
a hero. See, he hath gotten a thrust from a pikestaff in
his right shoulder to show for his pains.”</p>

<p>“Lord, Master Will, and you have been fighting?
Why, why; but now, William lad, do you bring Captain
into our back kitchen, where we can keep an eye on him
while he rests. There is enow straw on the floor to bed
half a dozen horses, for there were four wounded men
slept in it last night, that were fleeing to Pontefract
Castle, only they could get no further along the road.
These be sad times indeed, Master William. A pike-thrust,
quotha?”</p>

<p>So we had Captain into the outer kitchen, and gave
him a feed of corn to comfort him, after which I went
and sat against the fire in the front kitchen until such
time as he should be sufficiently rested to go on his
journey again. And, indeed, I myself was not sorry to
rest me a while, for, eager as I was to get home again,
the fatigue and excitement of the past two days and
nights was beginning to tell upon me and make me
sleepy. So there I sat on the long settle, the drover
having gone to his bed during our absence, and talked to
John Sanderson about the great fight of the previous
day, news of which had come to him in fragments all
day long.</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, Master Will,” said John, “we have had
our ears warmed by this news, I warrant you. For
some said that Prince Rupert and his army were cut to
pieces, and that York was in flames, and Marston Moor
sodden with blood. Ay, sad times indeed these be,
William, of a surety.”</p>

<p>“You would have thought so, John, if you had been
where I was yesterday,” I said, my mind dwelling on the
faces of the dead men I had seen.</p>

<p>“Why,” said he, “I dare say it was terrible work, and
old Mother Robey that lives at Church Garforth yonder,
she foretold that something would come to pass ere long.
For she had dreams, she said, of blood, and of horses
flying through the air, which meant, she said, ill tidings
and great disaster, and she saw the King’s crown fall
from a pillar, all of which is sad things, Master Will,
and disquieting to a sober man. Indeed, I know not
what the world is coming to nowadays.”</p>

<p>So he went on talking, for he was glib of tongue, until
his head began to nod, and presently he fell fast asleep
in his chair, and left me sitting there alone in the inn
kitchen. Sleep, too, was weighing down my own eyelids
very heavily, and I could have stretched myself along
the settle and fallen into slumber at once if it had not
been for my anxiety about getting forward on my
journey. However, that presently gave way under my
great need of rest, and I was very soon as fast asleep as
John Sanderson himself.</p>

<p>How long I slept I do not know, but when I awoke the
fire had burnt very low, and there was a faint streak of
gray light stealing in through the shutters. John
Sanderson still snored heavily in his chair. I was
rather cold and shivery, and was going to rise and draw
the fire together, when I heard steps outside, followed by
the pit-pat of a horse’s feet. A hand tapped at the
door, and John not showing any sign of awaking, I went
across the kitchen and undid the bolts. The morning
light shone in fresh and strong as I threw the door open,
and showed me the figure of a man standing outside the
threshold, holding his horse by the bridle. He was
turned away from me when the door opened, examining
his beast’s knees, which were cut as if by a fall, but at
the sound he faced round and looked full at me.</p>

<p>Now, I had never seen the man in my life before, and
did not know him from Adam, and I was therefore
something more than surprised when he started away
from me as if I had been a ghost. He held up one hand
to shield himself, as though I had motioned to strike
him, and there came over his face such a look of terrible
fear as I never saw on any other human countenance.</p>

<p>“God save me!” said he. “ ’Tis himself!”</p>

<p>“What is the matter, friend?” I cried. “It would
appear that my presence causes you some uneasiness.
Do I look so very dreadful, then?”</p>

<p>Now, a great look of relief came over the man’s face
when I spoke, and he drew himself up from his frightened
posture and stood staring at me curiously. He was a
tall, broad-shouldered man of more than middle age,
clad in clothes much stained with travelling, and
wearing a large horseman’s cloak over his shoulders.
His hair was gray, and his face much scarred and
seamed, as if he had seen all sorts of weather and taken
not a few blows.</p>

<p>“Sir, sir,” said he, stammering some words forth in his
confusion, “I beg your pardon, sir—you looked—in fact,
your honour gave me a great fright. You look so much
like—someone I once knew.”</p>

<p>He still stood and stared at me, examining my height
and breadth, and glancing at my face as if he could not
believe that I was other than a spirit. John Sanderson
meanwhile had awoke and was standing behind me,
looking at the stranger.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said the man once more, “so much like someone
I once knew.”</p>

<p>“Marry,” said John Sanderson, “then you knew his
father, friend, for this is the very spit of him as he was.
But ’tis cold work standing here, so come in, master, if
you want good accommodation for man or beast.”</p>

<p>The man tied his horse to a ring outside the porch,
and followed us inside.</p>

<p>“I could eat some food,” he said, “for I have ridden a
long way since night, and the horse would do with a
feed of corn.”</p>

<p>“You shall have both,” said John. “Plague on it!
who would ha’ thought the day was come already?
Three o’clock, as I am a living sinner. But then, ’tis
light nearly all night now.”</p>

<p>The stranger had taken his seat opposite me on the
settle, and I noticed that he kept glancing at me in
the same strangely curious fashion. I rose and went
towards the outer kitchen, where Captain was still
resting. The man’s eyes followed me as I moved.
looked round and caught them fixed upon me.</p>

<p>“You seem interested in me, friend,” I said, not exactly
liking to be stared at in this manner.</p>

<p>“I ask your pardon,” he answered. “I have not been
in these parts for many years, and I knew a man
then—perhaps it was your father, as the landlord said
just now I could have sworn you were he.”</p>

<p>“And what made you afraid, then?”</p>

<p>“Because the man I took you for is dead, “he said.
“Come, master, you would have been afraid yourself if
you had suddenly met a man whom you fancied dead
and buried these twelve years.”</p>

<p>“I suppose I should,” I answered, and went into the
outer kitchen and led Captain forth. He seemed to
have recovered by that time, and as I was anxious to be
off, I laid down my reckoning for John Sanderson on the
horse-block outside, and, mounting my horse, rode away
out of the yard. Looking round at the gate, I saw the
stranger staring at me from the window, one shutter of
which he had put back to get another glimpse of me ere
I departed. But as his queer fancies were naught to me,
I rode away, and ere long drew rein at the Barbican in
Pontefract, where I gave Sir Thomas Fairfax’s letter into
safe keeping for Sir Richard Lowther, and talked a while
with the guard on what things I had seen at York and
Marston. They would fain have kept me there for some
time, so that I might tell them more news of the battle,
but I was anxious to be home, and presently set out
again for Dale’s Field, where I arrived just as old Jacob,
always first to rise, was coming out on the doorstep to
see how the morning air smelt.</p>

<h2>XXIX</h2>

<h3>OF THE DEPARTURE OF CAPTAIN TREVOR</h3>

<p>Now, although I had been away from home but a few
days, I had in that short space of time passed through
such strange and remarkable adventures that it seemed
to me as though ages had elapsed since I had last seen
the familiar faces that smiled in welcome at my return.
I almost expected to hear that something wonderful had
taken place during my absence, and felt, I think,
surprised when Jacob Trusty told me that all was going
on as usual, and that nothing worthy of notice had
transpired while I had been away.</p>

<p>“Though indeed,” said he, as he walked by my horse’s
side toward the stables, “since you left us, Master
William, that rapscallion carpenter at Darrington hath
again beaten his wife and made a beast of himself with
strong drink, which, if the saying be true, is no news,
being what he hath done many a time afore. However,
he now lieth in the parish stocks, and hath been well
pelted with mud and rotten eggs, so that he is paid for
his naughtiness, say I; only thou seest, William, he had
our new cart in hand, and now we must needs wait a
while for it, that was badly wanted. But other news
than that there is none.”</p>

<p>“What of the gentleman that I brought in wounded?
Is he better, Jacob?”</p>

<p>“The women,” said Jacob, “have coddled and nursed
him, I promise you. What, he hath lived like a fighting
cock, and is now able to move about again. Yea, yea,
the young lasses do hover round him like a parcel of
hens round a young cock’ril. ’Tis a fine thing, I warrant
ye, William, to wear the King’s uniform and fight in the
wars.”</p>

<p>“Why, for that matter, Jacob,” I answered, “I have
worn his Majesty’s uniform while I’ve been away, and
have not only fought but got wounded.”</p>

<p>“What, thou hast fought, lad? With a sword, and
in battle? And hast killed thy man, I warrant, eh?”</p>

<p>“I killed one or two poor fellows, Jacob,” I said,
sighing at the thought of the dead men’s faces.</p>

<p>“God be praised!” said Jacob. “The King hath the
less enemies. Yea, I will warrant thee for a right
swashing blow. ’Twas I who taught thee, lad, eh?
And John, our parson’s son, did he kill his man, too?
Ay, ay, ay! Oh, if I had but been there to see it!
Thank the Lord for all mercies, say I.”</p>

<p>I was somewhat proud of my achievements, of which
I had to give a full and particular account to my mother
and the girls as soon as they appeared in the great
kitchen to give me my breakfast. Not a jot of my story
did they lose, nor did I spare any of the details save
when their faces showed such signs of fear that I forbore
to trouble them further. Glad indeed were they all
three to see me back, and embraced me one and all as if
I had returned from the dead instead of from so short a
journey.</p>

<p>“But what of your guest, mother?” said I, when I had
eaten and drunk and had delivered to Rose certain
messages sent by her father. “Jacob tells me he can move
about again and seems somewhat recovered.”</p>

<p>“He kept his bed until yesterday afternoon,” said
Lucy, “and then came down into the garden a while.
Such a white face as he has. You would not think that
he had much fighting in him.”</p>

<p>“He has been very ill,” said my mother, “for he has
lost a deal of blood, and I insisted on his keeping quiet.
But he is now somewhat recovered, and will, please God,
do well under my nursing. He has asked to see you,
William, when you can find it convenient to attend him,
for he heard of the battle yesterday and he is anxious to
hear your news.”</p>

<p>So I presently went up to the sick man’s chamber and
there told him all that I had seen and heard, he meanwhile
listening with much sorrow that the King’s cause
had again suffered a defeat.</p>

<p>“This Cromwell, Master Dale,” said he, “is showing
himself such a leader that I fear me he will obtain the
upper hand in the struggle. Time and again he beats
us by sheer persistence in his own methods. Yea, I
cannot see aught but defeat in this matter. Newcastle
and his following, you say, have gone, and our forces
are therefore the weaker. Alas! and while men are
wanted, here I lie helpless and naught but a burden
to you.”</p>

<p>“As to that, sir,” I hastened to say, “burden you
are none, for we count ourselves happy in being able to
serve you, and I am very sure that my mother will
not let you out of her keeping until you are cured and
sound.”</p>

<p>And that indeed she would not, for it was her great
delight to be nursing and healing of sick people, as all
that neighbourhood knew. So, however impatient Captain
Trevor was of the delay necessitated by his wound, he
was bound to remain at Dale’s Field until he was sound
again, for my mother treated him like a child and
prescribed and ordered for him just as she would have done
for me or Lucy had we been in like case. Now and then
her patient professed to repine at his cruel fate, but I
do not think that there was much reality in his sorrow,
for he had all that man can want and was never lonely.</p>

<p>Our harvest began early that year, and it was nearly
over by the middle of August, and Captain Trevor was still
with us. He had then so far recovered from the effects
of his wound that he was able to walk about the garden
and orchard, and even into the harvest field, which he
often did, accompanied by Rose and Lucy, who had not
been behindhand in nursing him. These two, indeed,
chiefly amused him and saw to his needs, for I was out
all day in the land, and my mother was busily occupied
about the house. These three, then, became great
friends, and you might find them at any hour of the
afternoon under one of the great apple-trees in our
orchard, the two maidens busy with their needles, and
the captain telling them stories of his adventures, of
which he had a considerable store, having travelled in
many lands and seen much service. For myself, I was
pleased that he and they should be thus diverted; but
Ben Tuckett, coming one day and finding them thus
engaged, was somewhat disturbed, and came straight to
me with a face as long as a fiddle.</p>

<p>“It seems to me, Will,” said worthy Benjamin, “that
one of us two, or maybe both, had better look to our
own business.”</p>

<p>“That, Ben,” said I, “is just what I am doing, for I
have been in this barley-field since five o’clock this
morning.”</p>

<p>“A fig for the barley!” said he. “What has that to
do with it? Oh, I know what these grand Cavalier
soldiers are!”</p>

<p>“Speak plainly, Ben.”</p>

<p>“Why,” said he, “here I come and find yonder fine
gentleman, whom you picked up on the wayside,
philandering under the apple-trees with our two sweethearts.
Body o’ me! I like it not. Why, as I live, he was
rendering to them a sonnet that he had written this
morning. A sonnet!”</p>

<p>“How will that hurt them, Ben? Let the lasses be
amused. I do not think thou couldst write a sonnet.”</p>

<p>“As to that,” he answered, “I do not know. I could, I
suppose, make ‘eyes’ rhyme with ‘skies,’ and ‘dove’
with ‘love,’ and so on, but that is neither here nor
there. I tell thee, Will, I like it not.”</p>

<p>“Thou art a fool, Ben, to speak plainly, if thou
thinkest that Lucy would give her heart to another man
when she has given it to thee already. Fie upon thee,
Ben! Why, thou shouldst trust her all in all.”</p>

<p>“Yea,” said he, looking somewhat ashamed of himself,
“and so I do, Will, so I do. God knows I do, old Will—but,
then, thou seest ’tis this way. ’Tis such a handsome
gentleman, this officer, and hath such a mighty
pretty manner of talking, and cannot even pass you a
tankard of small beer without a bow and a compliment.”</p>

<p>“And what of that, man?”</p>

<p>“Why, as thou knowest, I have none of these airs and
graces. I do not remember that anybody ever said I
was handsome, for, indeed, my nose it is a snub, and my
hair is red, and I have thought that my left ear was
somewhat longer than my right. And when I stand
up beside this fine gentleman, Will, I am at a
disadvantage. Thou knowest that maidens do notice these
things, and I am afraid that Lucy should make comparisons
between me and Captain Trevor.”</p>

<p>“It is true,” said I musingly, “that thy nose is a
snub.”</p>

<p>“It is, it is,” said he, turning very red. “Yes, it is,
Will.”</p>

<p>“And that thy hair is somewhat red in colour.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes; I said so just now.”</p>

<p>“And as for thy ears, I have myself noticed that one
of them is bigger than the other.”</p>

<p>“I know it,” he groaned. “I thought somebody must
have seen it.”</p>

<p>“And then thy mouth,” I continued, “is a good deal
too wide, and one eye is set lower down in thy face than
the other.”</p>

<p>“Oh!”</p>

<p>“In short, Ben, thou art not beautiful, but very plain.”</p>

<p>“Yes—as plain as a hayfork.”
“But thou hast a good heart, and I think the womenfolk
who know thee could put up with right-down
ugliness for the sake of it. What, man! you are a
despairing lover.”</p>

<p>So I rallied him, having no fears about my own
sweetheart, whose heart, I knew without question, was
mine, and mine for ever. Nay, I think that if I had
seen her amidst a crowd of gay gallants, and each one
paying compliments to her, it would not have troubled
me, for she had given me her word, and nothing could
have made me doubt her. And then, only the night
before, as we walked under the orchard trees in the
moonlight, I had teased her about this fine gentleman,
and had been answered according to my wishes.</p>

<p>“You will think your poor Will but dull company,” I
said, “when Captain Trevor goes away from us. Can
you not get him to teach me some of his accomplishments?”</p>

<p>“And what accomplishments would you learn?” she
answered quickly. “Do you think, Will, that I should
love you any the better if you could sing a French love-song
or scribble a bad sonnet? It is you that I love, my
dear, and you are enough.”</p>

<p>And with that I was content, and if it had not been
plenty, I had only to look into her dear eyes to read
double assurance of the great love that she had for me.
So you see that I was only amused when poor Ben came
to me with his doubts and fears.</p>

<p>But while I had not found it possible to believe that
either Lucy or Rose should fall in love with Captain
Trevor, I had not calculated on the effect they might
either of them produce on him. It did not occur to me
that, thrown into their society as he was, he would
naturally fall in love with one of them. And yet,
considering that they were both good and beautiful
maidens, I ought to have thought of it, and probably
should have done if I had not been inexperienced in
such matters.</p>

<p>The morning after Ben’s complaint to me, Captain
Trevor came up to my side, as I stood in the stackyard,
and asked me to walk aside with him. I noticed that he
looked somewhat careworn and haggard.</p>

<p>“Master Dale,” said he, “I am going to leave you
to-day.”</p>

<p>“I am sorry, sir,” I answered. “You do not look fit to
ride yet awhile. I am afraid my mother will not let you
go.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said he, smiling, “your good mother has
spoiled me, I fear. Never, I think, has man had such
kind treatment as I have had in this house.”</p>

<p>“Then stay, sir,” I said. “We shall be glad of your
company as long as ever it pleases you to be with us.
And you are not fit for service yet, I think.”</p>

<p>“No, “he answered. “No, I must lay up for a while
yet. You are very kind. But it must not be.”</p>

<p>He went away from me a little space and walked
a while by himself under the apple-trees, his head
bowed and his hands clasped behind him, so that it
seemed as if he were engaged in deep thought. But
presently he came to me again and stood before me.</p>

<p>“Master Dale,” said he, looking me frankly and
honestly in the face, “why should I not tell you all that
is in my mind? You have been so kind to me, you and
yours, that it would seem wrong to me if I did not open
my heart to you. Do you know, Master Dale, it is not
well for that same heart if I stay here!”</p>

<p>“No, sir?” I said, not understanding him.</p>

<p>“I have stayed too long,” he said, “too long already.
And I do not think that when I have gone I shall ever
forget one that I shall leave behind.”</p>

<p>Then my heart gave a great bound, for I knew what
he meant, and for an instant something like fear came
into it.</p>

<p>“Nay,” said he, perhaps seeing the apprehension in my
face, “nay, Master Dale, there is naught that need
disturb you. She is yours, and she hath never had the
slightest cause to suspect how it is with me. But who,
indeed, could see her and not love her? Let that be my
excuse.”</p>

<p>Now, I knew not what to say, being inwardly much
troubled that so honourable and gallant a gentleman
should have given his love where no love could be given
back to him. And as I could find no words, being
always very tongue-tied when I most wanted to speak,
I held out my hand to him so that the grip of my fingers
might tell him what I felt.</p>

<p>“And now,” said he, after we had clasped hands and
looked into each other’s eyes for a moment, “and now,
Master Dale, if you will have my horse saddled, I will
ride away. I was loath to be stopped by you, but I am
more loath to go.”</p>

<p>And, indeed, he had hard work to get away from us,
for my mother at first would not hear of his going, and
the girls were very much cast down about it, having
found him such good company. But he was firm in his
resolution, and at last he had said farewell to each of us
and to Jacob Trusty, and was mounted on his horse and
at the gate. As for my mother, she had become so
attached to him that she shed tears at his going, and the
maidens were not far from sharing in her grief.</p>

<p>“Let us go down to the gate to see him off,” said I to
Rose, and she went with me. “Give him a flower to put
in his coat, Rose. He will remember us by it until it
fades at least.”</p>

<p>But I knew that he would keep for ever what came from
her hands. She plucked a white rose from a bush that
stood near and gave it to him, as he leaned from his
horse to bid us farewell once more. He lifted it to his
lips, like the gallant cavalier he was, and placed it
above his heart. And then with one last word to us he
rode away, and we stood watching him until he disappeared
in the distance.</p>

<h2>XXX</h2>

<h3>OF THE FIRST SIEGE OF PONTEFRACT CASTLE</h3>

<p>Ben Tuckett, I think, was somewhat comforted when he
heard that Captain Trevor had ridden away, but he had
hardly recovered his peace of mind when a fresh matter
came to trouble him. This time it was not his heart
that was threatened, but his pocket, and though Ben
was a true and honest lover, he had a trader’s liking for
his broad pieces, and cared not to see his substance
threatened, nor his trade likely to suffer injury.</p>

<p>It was Ben’s way to come to me with all his doubts
and fears, and I felt sure that something had happened,
or was about to happen, when I caught sight of him
coming along the highway one morning about a week
after Captain Trevor had left us. His head hung very
low, and his face was so doleful that I wondered if there
had been a fire in his shop, or if thieves had stolen his
goods.</p>

<p>“Why, how now, Ben?” said I. “What fresh matter
hath come to trouble thee? Thou lookest as if all the
woes of the world were settling on thy shoulders.”</p>

<p>“Alas, Will!” said he, and sat him down on the low
wall that shuts out our fold from the house. “Alas! I
think there is naught but trouble in this world. One
down, and t’other comes on before you have got your
wind again. Alas! and I had just painted my
shop—three pound did it cost, honest money, hardly earned.
Yes, three pound did I pay to John Simpson for painting
of it, and now I dare say shop and stock will be
burnt up.”</p>

<p>“What, is there a fire in the town?”</p>

<p>“Nay, said he, “but there will be fire–yea, and
smoke and all.”</p>

<p>“It strikes me, Ben, that your wits are gone a-wool-gathering.
What is all this talk of fire and smoke?”</p>

<p>“My wits are as sound as thine. What, man, have
you not heard, then, that the Roundheads are going to
besiege the Castle? “</p>

<p>“Yes, many a time during this last three years.”</p>

<p>“Ay, but the investment hath begun. Colonel Sands
fell in with a foraging party from the Castle yesterday,
and killed some, captured others, took all the cattle,
and made forty horse prisoners.”</p>

<p>Now, this was news indeed, for though we had
expected that Pontefract Castle would be besieged sooner
or later, there had been such delay in the commencement
of active operations that we had begun to think
the enemy were never coming to decisive action in the
matter. This Colonel Sands, indeed, had been sent by
the Parliamentarians to invest Pontefract Castle soon
after the great fight at Marston Moor, but his force was
so small that he had done little more than keep an eye
on the motions of the garrison.</p>

<p>“And now,” continued Ben, “they will be fighting and
slaying night and day, and the soldiers will take what
they please in the town without paying for it, and some
of their bombs are sure to hit my shop, and perchance
set it afire, and then where shall I be? Even if it is
not set on fire, it will be dashed to pieces, which is just
as bad.”</p>

<p>However, as things turned out, Ben’s sorrowful
anticipations were not realized for another month or
two, for Colonel Sands, getting no further reinforcement,
was obliged to content himself by sitting down before
the Castle, and waiting until such time as help came to
him. After a time the castles of Helmsley and
Knaresborough fell, and the troops that had besieged them
being thus set free to pursue other service, they came to
Pontefract under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax,
who early in December drove in the garrison, seized the
town, and began a close investment of the Castle.</p>

<p>Now, at that time the Castle of Pontefract, which is
now reduced to ruins, was one of the strongest fortresses
in England, being almost impregnable on account of its
situation It was built upon a great rock, from the
summits of which are to be seen most diversified views
of the surrounding country. Looking towards the
north-west you will see the valley of the Aire, which
winds in and out through meadow and sand until it is lost
in the far distance amongst the hills of Craven. To the
north and the north-east the land is flat, but extremely
rich in woods, and beyond these rise the towers of York
Minster. To the eastward, the Aire pursues its way towards
the Humber, passing through a rolling country, and
underneath the great hills of Brayton and Hambledon, which
relieve the somewhat flat character of the land thereabouts.
Southward the landscape presents a fine
prospect of agricultural country, and to the south-west
the hills of Derbyshire, in the neighbourhood of that
great eminence which they call the Peak, rise up and
shut out further prospect. How many villages and
thorpes you may see from the height of this rock I
cannot say; only I know that wherever you look you
will catch sight of a gray spire peeping over the thick
groves that shut in the red-roofed villages.</p>

<p>But if the prospect from the various towers and
battlements was a fine one, the Castle itself was not less
worth seeing. In my school-days, indeed, I was never
at a loss for something to look at and admire so long as
I could run out of bounds to the great fortress built by the
De Lacys, so many hundred years before. There I have
spent many an hour in company with Jack Drumbleforth
and Ben Tuckett, gazing at the towers and the
drawbridges and the barbicans, where a watch was kept
for the coming of an enemy. Once or twice, too, I had
been admitted within the Castle, and had wandered
about it, wondering at it more and more with every step
I took. For there were so many curious nooks and
corners in it that it was just the sort of place a lad likes
to spend an afternoon in, especially if he be fond, as I
was, of aught appertaining to war. Later on, when I
had grown up nearly to a man’s estate, I became more
closely acquainted with the Castle, and did often go there
to see certain friends of mine who were attached to the
garrison. Now, when I heard that General Fairfax had
arrived in front of the Castle and intended besieging
it, my first thought was that he would have naught but
his pains for his gains, for the place was so exceedingly
strong, and so favoured by its natural position, that I
did not think any besieging force, however powerful,
could dislodge a resolute garrison already in possession.
I have told you that the Castle stood on a great rock,
which, being raised to a considerable height, did tower
high above the surrounding ground. Then there was a
deep moat on the west side, and another on the east,
and all round the battlements were towers from which
active operations could be kept up against the enemy
with great safety to the defenders. Round the great
yard of the Castle stood seven larger towers, and beyond
the western extremity of the yard was the keep, which
was built of an extraordinary strength, as the thickness
of the ruined walls will show you to this day. As there
was no high ground in the immediate neighbourhood of
the Castle, the highest being Baghill, some little
distance away, the besieging force was naturally at a
disadvantage, and likely to lose more men in carrying
out its operations than were the besieged, who could
keep up a steady fire upon their enemies without exposing
themselves to much danger. Nevertheless, by
making a close investment, it was possible to starve the
garrison into a surrender, and this was what General
Fairfax prepared to do rather than to seize the Castle
by sheer force of arms.</p>

<p>The investment had no sooner begun than life was
lost on either side, the Parliamentarians, however,
suffering much more considerably than the Royalists.
The siege having closely begun on Christmas Day, 1644,
the first skirmishes took place around the ancient church
of All Saints, which stands at the foot of the Castle on
the west side. Now, the church was so valuable an
outwork, both of security and defence, that certain of
the besieged endeavoured to retain possession of it, and
were soon resisted in that enterprise by the
Parliamentarians, who came in strength and finally drove
out the little garrison of the church, of whom they killed
four men and wounded eleven. This victory, however,
cost them dear, for the defence was kept up so gallantly
that sixty of the attacking force were slain and forty
more wounded.</p>

<p>After this preliminary engagement the siege went
forward briskly enough, and at first the garrison had a
distinct advantage and caused the Parliamentarians
much annoyance by their steady fire from the towers of
the Castle. Presently, however, Lord Fairfax, father of
Sir Thomas, brought reinforcements to his son, and with
him came the cannon which had been used at the sieges
of Helmsley and Knaresborough, so that the attacking
force became well equipped for their work. Before they
began the erection of their batteries, however, Lord
Fairfax despatched a message to Colonel Lowther,
governor of the Castle, summoning him to surrender at
once. To this epistle Colonel Lowther presently
returned answer, that according to his allegiance he
would defend the Castle to the utmost of his power,
trusting to God and the virtue of his cause for
assistance. After which there was no more to be said on
either side, and the enemy, recognising this, began their
cannonade from several quickly constructed batteries, built
on the rising ground all round the Castle, and in the space
of the next three days they poured over one thousand balls
into the walls and towers which they were anxious to
destroy. So well were their guns laid, that on the 19th
of January the Pix Tower, which was one of the seven
that surrounded the courtyard, fell down with a great
noise and carried a portion of the Castle wall with it,
whereby a breach was made and the besiegers’ hopes of
a speedy victory considerably heightened. It was then
expected by the garrison that an assault would be made
upon them, and their fear of this was increased when
they saw the enemy’s horse and foot drawn up as if
in readiness to advance against them. The Governor,
however, exhorted them with much confidence to the
performance of their duty, and the whole garrison
manned the towers and walls and made ready to defend
their position with great cheerfulness. Lord Fairfax,
however, thought it unwise to attempt an assault by way
of the breach, and gave orders that the blockade should
continue, so that the besieged might be starved into
surrender. Shortly after this Lord Fairfax returned to
York, leaving his son, Sir Thomas, in command, who
in his turn was succeeded immediately afterwards by
Colonel Lambert, under whom the further operations
were carried out.</p>

<p>The garrison did not suffer the breach to be widened,
but hastened to repair the damage already done, and so
well did they work that presently the hole was filled up
again, and all fear of a sudden surprise removed. The
Parliamentarians, however, seemed not to favour an
assault, and soon began to mine in the neighbourhood of
the towers. One mine came from the hospital at the
east end of the Castle, and was made in the direction of
the King’s Tower. Another was begun in the house of
one Ward, a burgess who lived near the Castle, and was
directed towards the Round Tower. The besieged,
however, speedily frustrated the designs of the enemy by
sinking counter-mines, which ran from pits dug within
the walls and proceeded in the direction of the besiegers’
works. Of these mines there were some hundred and
thirty in and about the Castle, so that the ground in that
quarter was like a honeycomb.</p>

<p>When February set in poor Ben Tuckett’s fears began
to be realized, for the garrison commenced a regular fire
against the besiegers and considerable damage was done
in various parts of the town. Several houses in
Micklegate were reduced to ruins, and there was none safe
from receiving a cannon-shot through its walls. Fresh
horrors were added to this state of things when certain
houses in Northgate, which had been occupied by the
Parliamentarians, were set on fire and left to destruction.
Then, indeed, did Ben’s face grow long and sad, for he
saw naught but ruin for him and his fellow-traders, who
loved not the presence of the Parliamentarian troops in
their midst and would have given a good deal to see
them march away. This desire, however, was anything
but gratified, for reinforcements kept coming into the
town, so that the besieging force attained greater
proportions.</p>

<p>Before the end of February the garrison were in dire
straits for want of provisions, and the Governor, coming
to the conclusion that he must soon be forced to capitulate
unless help and supplies came, despatched messengers to
the King, informing his Majesty of the condition they
were in. This appeal was not in vain, for the King
immediately despatched Sir Marmaduke Langdale with
two thousand men to the assistance of the garrison at
Pontefract. This army of succour came from Oxford by
way of the Midlands and Doncaster, and passed our
house at Dale’s Field about three o’clock in the afternoon
of March 1st. They marched on to Darrington and
there turned aside to Carleton, forming finally in the
Chequer Field, immediately in sight of the Castle, where
they gave battle to the enemy at six o’clock in the
evening, the beleaguered garrison anxiously watching
the progress of the fight. In this engagement the
Royalists were victorious on every side, and the
Parliamentarians were driven from the town and lost many
men and a great quantity of arms. Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, having pursued them as far as Ferrybridge,
returned to the Castle at eleven o’clock that night, and
was received with such gratitude as you may well
conceive would be shown by a garrison which was
already beginning to experience the pangs of hunger.</p>

<p>So, as Ben Tuckett joyfully said, the siege was over,
having lasted little more than eight weeks, and the
victory rested with the loyal garrison. No light victory
was it either, for the Parliamentarians had lost five
hundred killed and over one thousand prisoners, while
the besieged had lost but a hundred men. The Royalists
were overjoyed at the success of their cause at
Pontefract, and Ben Tuckett had some thoughts of putting
on a cheerful countenance once more, but the gladness of
both was considerably damped before many days were
passed by the appearance of a great Parliamentary force,
which gathered round the Castle and set itself to carry
out a second siege.</p>

<h2>XXXI</h2>

<h3>OF THE SECOND SIEGE OF PONTEFRACT CASTLE.</h3>

<p>Now, those who rejoiced that the investment of the
Castle had come to so speedy an end were considerably
disappointed when they found that Sir Marmaduke
Langdale and his men were under the necessity of
speedily retreating southward again, which they did in a
few days, thus leaving the relieved garrison once more
to the mercy of the Parliamentarians, who at once began
collecting in the neighbourhood and preparing for
another siege. But those few days of relief were made
full use of by the garrison, which set itself earnestly to
the task of procuring such store of provision as should
enable it to withstand further assaults of the enemy.
Excursions were made every day into the surrounding
country, and great stock of live and dead food exacted
from the farmers in all the neighbouring villages. Here
and there these contributions were given cheerfully, for
the King had many followers in those parts; but the
garrison, if they found any who were disposed to resist
seizure, made a virtue of necessity and carried away
grain or cattle without more to-do, and, indeed, the
Parliamentarians did likewise. As for myself, I drove
twelve good head of cattle into the Castle with my own
hands, and, moreover, sent in twelve loads of my best
wheat, for I had no mind to see those who were fighting
for his Majesty reduced to starvation.</p>

<p>At this time it became a question with me as to
whether or no I should join the garrison which was
maintaining Pontefract Castle for the King. I was
doing no good at home, for it was not a busy season, and
I could do nothing single-handed against the Roundheads,
who rode into my yard whenever they pleased
and seized upon whatever they wanted, pig, horse, or
cow. I had no fears on account of the women now, for
the experiences of the first siege had shown me that the
Parliamentary army was in the main sober and well
conducted, and zealously watched by its officers, so that
no excess of any kind might occur. Moreover, my
mother, who was exceedingly loyal and spent many an
hour praying for the success of the King’s cause, was all
for me to go into the Castle and help its defenders, who,
as I have previously told you, numbered amongst themselves
some of the noblest and most honourable gentlemen of
Yorkshire. But though my natural inclinations
were all for volunteering, I lingered in some slight
indecision until Ben Tuckett, who was always showing
himself in some curious light, prompted me to make up
my mind quickly.</p>

<p>For Benjamin, presenting himself before us one
afternoon in the middle of March, 1645, announced with no
little pride that he was about to distinguish himself.</p>

<p>“Will,” quoth he, as he stood before the fire in our
great kitchen, and looked round upon all of us with a
commanding air, “Will, I am going to do a great thing.
Nay, but I am indeed, and it will be well for you if you
do take example by me. I am going to join the garrison
in the Castle.”</p>

<p>“Oh!” said Lucy, “he will be killed.”</p>

<p>“I hope not,” said Ben. “However, as well be killed
inside as outside. It is no use attempting to do my own
business with two armies fighting all round me. And
between thee and me, Will, I love not these Roundhead
knaves. Faugh! I cannot abide them, I tell you. For
they are for ever quoting Scripture unto me, and at the
same time they will enter my shop and steal from it such
goods as take their fancy, without so much as a ‘by
your leave.’ So I am going into the Castle. What!
there are four or five aldermen gone in already and have
sworn to defend it. Can I do better than follow an
alderman’s example?”</p>

<p>“No, Ben, certainly you cannot do better.”</p>

<p>“Why, then, I’ll tell thee what I have done, Will. I
have conveyed all my goods into the Castle and handed
them over to the Governor for the use of the garrison,
merely hinting to him that if ever the King should have
his own again I shall expect some little trifling reward,
such as a knighthood or a baronetcy. ’Tis no slight
present I have made them, Mistress Dale, I assure you.”</p>

<p>“I am sure you will have been kind to them, Ben,”
answered my mother.</p>

<p>“Yea, indeed I have,” said Ben. “Twenty-four sacks
of best flour, and sixteen York hams, all my stock of
foreign spices and such-like things, with fruits and
preserves, and all that had been left to me by those
Roundhead rogues, who, to tell truth, did pillage me
very unmercifully, and made matters worse by exhorting
me to repentance. Well, I suppose I shall have my
share of what I have carried in to the garrison. But
there will be many mouths to fill, and ’tis said the
Roundheads will starve us out in the end. I like not
that word starvation. But what can a man do? I have
already had one cannon-shot through my roof, and there
will be more to follow it presently. And thou seest,
Will, from what I can make out, a man is not so liable
to accidents within the Castle—there are so many nooks
and corners where one can get out of the way of a
bullet.”</p>

<p>“Oh, fie, Master Ben!” said Rose. “You are surely
not afraid of a bullet or two?”</p>

<p>“I am not afraid of ten thousand bullets,” answered
Ben, “if only they do not come near me. Why any man
should want to stand in the way of a bullet I cannot
think. Nay, I am hoping to come off with a whole skin,
and shall be wise and prudent. But now, Will, are you
going to join the garrison?”</p>

<p>“If I do, Ben, I am afraid I shall be constantly in the
way of bullets.”</p>

<p>“Oh,” said he, “you were always ready for fighting.
However, if you get shot, I will nurse you.”</p>

<p>It was in this way that both Ben and myself joined
the garrison at the beginning of the second siege, which
began, as near as I can reckon it, about the 21st of
March in that year. On that day a body of the Parliamentary
forces took possession of the upper part of the
town and engaged some of our troops in battle, whereby
we lost one or two killed, while others were taken
prisoners. For a while, however, the lower town was
in our hands, and from it we drew further supplies of
wood and provisions, thus strengthening ourselves more
securely against the siege. It soon became evident to us
that the Parliamentarians intended to force us to
surrender by means of a blockade rather than by an
assault. They commenced a regular series of
entrenchments and outworks, and finally surrounded us with
a complete circle of forts, guards, and trenches, from
which their operations were zealously conducted. We
did not suffer them to pursue the making of these
works in peace, but continually hampered them with a
heavy fire from our towers and battlements, so that
there was hardly a day passed in which they did not
suffer loss of their men.</p>

<p>Now, if I were to tell you all that happened during
the time that I was in the Castle as one of its defenders,
I should have to occupy your time somewhat more fully
than you would expect, for there were fresh adventures
every day, and from one reason or other I was always
mixed up with them. Ben and I had joined the division
of volunteers serving under Sir John Ramsden, and here
we found some very good company, Mr. Shillito, the
Mayor of Pontefract, being of us, together with
Aldermen Lunn and Wilkinson and other gentlemen of the
town, who had banded themselves together to defend
the King’s cause. None of us, I think, were disposed
to allow the enemy to blockade us in peace, and we were
always ready to sally forth and attack them in their
trenches and works. Even Ben Tuckett, growing braver
every day, did pluck up such spirit that he was never
behindhand, and fought with as much bravery as the
rest of us.</p>

<p>As for the sallies that we made from the Castle during
the next few weeks, they were legion, and in every one
of them the enemy came off second best, invariably
losing a goodly number of men. On the 4th of April
we went out, ninety strong, and charged against
Alderman Rusby’s house and killed an officer and three
men, after which we set the house and barns on fire.
The next day a great party of us, horse and foot, went
out under Captains Walkington, Beale, and Smith, and had
a brush with the enemy, during which we took two loads
of fresh meat that were being carried into the town, and
conveyed them safely into the Castle. On Easter Sunday
a still greater body of us went out of the Swillington
Tower and sallied up Northgate to attack the works
situated there; while another party, equally large in
numbers, went out from the lower gate and attacked the
enemy’s trenches on the south side of the town by the
Halfpenny house. In these encounters the Parliamentarians
suffered considerably, for though we only lost two
men ourselves, we killed one hundred and thirty of our
enemies and took one man prisoner, together with a
quantity of muskets and swords.</p>

<p>So the struggle went on, never a day passing that did
not see some fresh development of hostilities. The
Parliamentarians worked steadily at their trenches and
forts, and kept up a steady fire at us, and we on our
part never ceased to harass and worry them by resolute
sallies, in which we always came off with success.
Indeed, upon some of these occasions we had a good deal
to fight for, for our store of fresh meat was quickly
exhausted, and if it had not been for our occasional
seizure of cattle we should have had to go without any. Now
and then, however, we caught sight of small herds being
driven into the town, and on these occasions a body of
us would sally forth and fight for them, and we generally
did so well that we brought the cattle safe into our
courtyard and thus staved off starvation for a few days
longer.</p>

<p>At these times nobody fought more keenly or fiercely
than Ben Tuckett, whom necessity had succeeded in
making a thorough man of war. He would rush upon
the enemy with the most terrible cries and shouts,
brandishing his sword so vigorously that the Roundheads
often flew from him before he had well reached them.
Then nobody would rejoice more than he did, and he
would return to the Castle driving the captured cattle as
if they were some great prize, as indeed they were, fresh
meat being ofttimes rare with us.</p>

<p>“You see, Will,” said he one day, aswe stood watching
the enemy from the Barbican, “I cannot abide to see
cattle going as it were by our very door when we have
such need of it inside, and I feel that I must strike a
blow for the possession of it, or die. ’Tis such a terrible
feeling, that hungering for a slice of good beef or mutton,
and thou knowest there have been one or two days when
we could not get even a thin shaving of either.”</p>

<p>“There will be a good many days, Ben, in the time
that is coming, when I dare say we shall be glad enough
of a crust of dry bread.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said he. “ ’Tis sad to think of. However,
what must be, must be. But when I think of thy
mother’s larder, Will, and what I have often seen it
contain, alack! I am like to weep. Dost thou remember,
for instance, the meat pasties that Lucy
makes? I would give the King’s crown for one of
those meat pasties at this moment.”</p>

<p>I laughed to hear him talk in that fashion, but there
was something in what he said, for provisions were not
great, and they had to be given out very carefully or
else they would not have lasted many days. For myself
I cared little, for though I am a big man and have
always been able to play a good part with knife and
fork, I was never very nice about my food, and could
satisfy my hunger on dry bread, whereas poor Ben had
been so petted and pampered by the women that he had
gotten a craving for all sorts of delicacies, and was for
ever sighing after the flesh-pots of Egypt.</p>

<p>During April and May the siege went on as it had
begun, the Parliamentarians surrounding us with a
complete ring of trenches and forts, while we never
ceased to harass them by our fire and by resolute sallies.
They were constantly receiving reinforcements from
various parts of the country. On the 18th of April six
hundred Scotch arrived under the command of Colonel
Montgomery, and received a warm reception from us,
for we fired our cannon into their midst and killed
several of their officers and men. On the 26th of the
same month a hundred and fifty men came over the
high ground beyond Ferrybridge to join the Roundheads,
and about a fortnight afterwards they were further
strengthened by a troop of horse, which came from
Doncaster and joined the main guard at the New Hall.
Reinforcements indeed were constantly arriving, so that
the number of our assailants became considerably
increased, and we were completely surrounded by them on
all sides. Nevertheless our spirits never drooped, nor
did we relax our efforts, and our hopes of ultimate
victory were raised by the good news which we
occasionally received. On the 22nd of May the Governor
received letters from the King and from Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, by which we learnt that an army was coming
to our relief, which news was heartily and gladly
welcomed by us. Then we heard from the garrison besieged
in Sandal Castle that it had secured a fresh supply of
provisions and would be able to hold out yet awhile, and
from Scarborough Castle came news of a great sally
there made by the besieged, who had driven away the
Parliamentarians with great slaughter and had spiked
all their cannon. This and other favourable news
spurred us on to fresh endeavours, and raised our hope
that we should be able to hold the Castle of Pontefract
until help arrived. It was indeed only a question of
food and provisions with us, for the place was so strong
and so well fortified that an army of twenty thousand
men could not have dislodged us unless hunger had
come to help them in their work</p>

<h2>XXXII</h2>

<h3>OF THE EVIL NEWS FROM DALE’S FIELD</h3>

<p>Now at midnight on the 27th of May, while I was
sleeping in my quarters, there came to me Ben Tuckett,
who had been on guard at the Barbican, and woke me
somewhat hurriedly, saying that I must rise at once and
go with him. Whereupon I rose from my bed, which
was none of the softest, and began to rub the sleep out
of my eyes, wondering what had happened.</p>

<p>“What is it, Ben?” said I, with a prodigious yawn
between every word. “Hath the enemy departed, or
are they going to assault us?”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis better news than that,” he answered, “for there
is prospect, lad, of fresh meat for many a day to come.”</p>

<p>“Always thy stomach, Ben!”</p>

<p>“And why not?” he asked. “But hasten, Will,
for here is Captain Wheatley, whom the Governor despatched
to Sandal t’other day, just returned with good news.
He hath brought fifty horsemen with him, and they
have driven a herd of cattle before them, and are now
guarding them outside the town while he contrives some
means whereby to bring them inside the Castle. So
hasten, lad, and let us help, for the cattle number over
a hundred, and will stand us in fresh meat this many
a day.”</p>

<p>This was indeed good news, and I lost no time in
arming myself and hastening into the great courtyard
where Captain Wheatley and the Governor were making
plans for bringing the cattle in.</p>

<p>“How say you?” said the Governor, as I drew near
to them. “The cattle number one hundred and thirty,
and are in the Chequer Field. We must make a bold
bid for their possession. Let us see now how we can
manage this matter. Come, Will Dale, you are a farmer,
and should have some good counsel for us. What do
you say?”</p>

<p>Thus appealed to, I began to consider the matter,
and having made myself familiar with it, I could do no
better than suggest that Captain Wheatley should return
to the cattle and drive them gently from the Chequer
Field to the top of Baghill, and that, meanwhile, parties
from the Castle should go out in various directions
and prevent the enemy from interfering with our plans.
This advice seemed good to the Governor, and Captain
Wheatley presently went out of the Castle again and
rode away to rejoin his booty, while the rest of us made
preparations for carrying our project to a happy end.
We were at that time entirely bereft of fresh meat,
and there was not a man amongst us that did not
resolve to do all in his power to bring this valuable herd
into the Castle.</p>

<p>Everything being in readiness, Captain Flood went
out with fifty musketeers, and advanced towards Baghill,
having orders not to enter the enemy’s works, but to
remain under the hill and direct a steady fire against
the outposts. They were followed by Colonel Gilbreth
and forty musketeers, who took their way to Primrose
Close, under Baghill, where they dislodged the enemy
from their trenches, and forced them to retreat. After
them went Captain Smith, with thirty musketeers, who
proceeded to Broad Lane End, and held the Roundheads
in check at that point. A fourth party, under
Captain Munroe, went out through the east gate, and
took up a position against the enemy’s works below the
church, so that none of them might come from the
forts at Monkhill or New Hall.</p>

<p>When all this was done and the enemy held in check
all along the line, Captain Walker and a small body
of men, amongst whom were Ben Tuckett and myself,
went out through the closes beyond the church, and
met the cattle, which were on the top of Baghill, guarded
by Captain Wheatley and the fifty horsemen who had
come with him from Sandal Castle. It was a dark
night, and we could barely make out the presence of
these unknown friends, but we had scarcely advanced
close to them when I heard a voice which made the
blood leap in my veins.</p>

<p>“I and my companion, master sergeant, are going
forward with these beasts here, for we have letters for
Colonel Lowther, and shall maybe stay with him when
they are delivered. So back to Sandal with you we
shall not.”</p>

<p>“Jack! Jack!” I cried, for I knew his voice without
doubt, “I am here, Jack, and so is Ben. What brings
you here, and where is Philip Lisle?”</p>

<p>“Here, lad,” answered Philip; and in another instant
Ben and I were shaking hands with both of them, right
glad to meet them again, though we could not see their
faces in the darkness.</p>

<p>“We have ridden across country from Lancashire,”
said Philip, “with letters for Colonel Lowther, and fell
in with this party from Sandal yesterday evening. But
we will tell you more, lads, when we have helped you in
with these cattle.”</p>

<p>“Yea,” said Ben, “let us get the cattle in first of all.
I am glad indeed to see you, gentlemen, or to know you
are there, for I cannot see you at all-but the prospect
of roast meat! Alas! what shall we do if these cattle
escape us?”</p>

<p>But the cattle did not escape us, for we presently
drove them down the hill towards the Castle gates,
guiding them between the lines formed by our men, who
were now keeping the enemy back by means of a smart
fusillade. And though by overhastiness we lost some
thirty of them, which broke through and fell into the
hands of the Roundheads, we succeeded in driving about
a hundred into the Castle, whereupon our drums beat a
retreat, and our men came in without having suffered
any loss. Then indeed our spirits were raised to a high
pitch, for we had now enough provision to last us a good
while longer. Certain of our men, in order to testify to
the general joy of the garrison, lighted bonfires on the
towers, which made a brave show, while the gunners
opened a brisk fire on the enemy, and kept it up for
some considerable time.</p>

<p>During the following day Ben and I had many things
to talk over with Philip Lisle and Jack Drumbleforth,
and spent as much time with them as we could spare
from our duties. Both were much diverted at the
thought of Ben turning soldier, and Jack rallied him no
little on his martial air and gallant deeds.</p>

<p>“Why,” said Ben, “indeed I see not why I should not
be as great a warrior as any amongst you. ’Tis said
that hunger will make a man do aught, and if that
be true, I have reason enough to commit heroic acts.
Alas! do you know, Master Lisle, I have lost nigh upon
a stone of my weight since I came into this Castle!
Yea, and can take my belt up three holes, which shows
that I am naught like so bulky as I was.”</p>

<p>“That is all the better for thee,” said Jack.</p>

<p>“I am not so sure about it,” said Ben. “A fat man is
always comfortable, save in summer, and then ’tis his
own fault if he is not, for there is a cool corner in every
alehouse, and a shady side in every street. Indeed, I
cannot think of aught more delightful than being a
well-fed, plump sort of man, with no care and a good
appetite.”</p>

<p>“Talking of appetites, Ben,” said I, “the butcher hath
killed some of the oxen this morning, and I dare say you
will get a ration of beef ere the day is out.”</p>

<p>“And well it will agree with me,” he answered. But
now, lads, let me tell you something. ’Tis my birthday
to-day, and I am minded to entertain ye all. What say
you if we put our rations together and have a decent
roast? The butcher, I dare say, would cut it for us all
in one piece. And hark ye, gentlemen, I have a small
cask of burgundy hidden away close by, so that you can
wash your meat down with something better than small
ale.”</p>

<p>“Agreed, Ben!” we all cried, and wished him long life
and happiness, so that he went away mighty pleased, to
make arrangements for his little feast and persuade the
butcher to cut him a piece out of the sirloin. He was
very busy all that day until supper-time, when he
fetched us into a little apartment in one of the towers,
where he had set out the birthday feast for our
entertainment.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis not a very fine banquet, gentlemen,” said honest
Ben, “for, as you see, there is naught but the beef and
this loaf of wheaten bread and yonder bit of cheese,
which came from my own shop when we fled to the
Castle. However, here is the little cask of wine, which
hath been hidden in a nice cool place, I assure you. So
now, lads, sit down and fall to.”</p>

<p>This we did with a right good will, for food was not
over-plentiful with us in the Castle at that time, and
much eating of salt meats had whetted our appetites for
something newly killed. As for Philip and Jack, they
had not experienced over-good times during their recent
adventures, and were hardly behind us in prowess with
knife and fork. Wherefore in half an hour the table
was cleared of food and we had naught to contemplate
but the diligently scraped bone of the beef.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said Ben, “what a beautiful thing is a piece of
fresh meat! And what a spirit it doth put into a man!
I feel as if I could go forth and fight every Roundhead
that ever was born, including Cromwell himself.
However, I am not on duty to-night, and am well content
to sit here, gentlemen, with my pipe of tobacco and my pot
of wine—I could not lay hand on any glass, Master
Lisle—and hearken to the lads outside firing at the
crop-eared knaves that besiege us. But now, Master Lisle,
what do you think of these matters? Which will prevail,
Roundhead or Cavalier?”</p>

<p>“Nay, Ben,” said Philip, “ ’tis more than I can say.
The prospect is not over-promising for us at present, I
think, for the Parliamentarians are more resolved than
ever. And yet I cannot think that this people of
England will throw down the monarchy altogether.
Thrown down for a season it may be; but if Charles the
First is deposed, Charles the Second will reign in his
stead.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said Ben, “we are in a pretty coil. But come,
lads, ’tis my birthday, so let us be merry. We shall
have time enow for sorrow to-morrow. Jack, lad, give
us a song such as you used to sing in the old days
when neither Roundhead nor Cavalier vexed our souls.”</p>

<p>“Yes, give us a song, Jack,” said I. “It seems an age
since I heard your voice.”</p>

<p>“I have but a poor voice,” said Jack, “for it hath had
little practice of late and is grown rusty. However, you
shall have a little song that I made one night recently as
I sat by the camp-fire.”</p>

<p>He filled his mug with wine from the cask, and having
drank, gave us the following verses:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>“Pledge me, pledge me, Phyllis mine,<br />
In this cup of rosy wine!<br />
Drink to Life, to Love, to Laughter,<br />
Drink to everything that’s jolly,<br />
Hence with time and the hereafter,<br />
And with aught that’s melancholy.<br />
Let’s drive forth all care and sorrow<br />
To the never-born to-morrow.</p>

<p>“Kiss me, kiss me, Phyllis mine,<br />
While my eyes look into thine!<br />
There I see two laughing fairies<br />
Full of love and mischief making,<br />
Whose emotion quickly varies,<br />
Now with roguish laughter shaking,<br />
Then with sudden seriousness<br />
Asking for a long caress.</p>

<p>“Pledge me, pledge me, Phyllis mine,<br />
While the liquor leaps divine!<br />
Wreath the cups with showers of roses,<br />
White and red and pink and yellow,<br />
Weave them into fragrant posies<br />
Round about the wine so mellow,<br />
That with flowers and song we may<br />
Lie and laugh the whole spring day.</p>

<p>“Pledge me, pledge me, Phyllis mine,<br />
While the April skies are fine!<br />
Spring’s the time for love and laughing,<br />
Tender glance and shy caresses;<br />
Wherefore let’s the bowl be quaffing<br />
While the sun through these bright tresses<br />
Shoots his amorous beams and tries<br />
To catch the gold that in them lies.”</p>

</blockquote>

<p>We had barely ceased applauding Jack’s song, when a
knock came at our door and a voice inquired if Master
Dale stayed within.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis Belwether’s voice,” said Ben. “He has returned
from Newark. Come in, Master Belwether, and drink
my health. We are having a party in honour of my
birthday. Nay, man, be not bashful. Sit thee down
and drink off thy pot.”</p>

<p>“Your good health, Master Tuckett,” said Belwether.
“Nay, gentlemen, I had no idea of what you were at,
but, as you know, the Governor sent me to Newark
t’other day, and I am just come in again, and did wish
for Master Dale there so that I could give him a letter
that his mother entrusted to my care as I passed Dale’s
Field an hour ago.”</p>

<p>“Are they all well there?” I asked, as he gave me the
letter. “Indeed I am beholden to you for this service.
We had had no news of them for a fortnight—had we,
Ben?”</p>

<p>“Open thy letter and read,” said Ben. “Master
Belwether, another pot of wine for thy good news. Now,
Will, read it aloud.”</p>

<p>But I had gone to the light and was reading the letter
before he spoke, and all of a sudden I let the sheet fall
from my hand and fell back against the wall,
overwhelmed by the evil tidings I saw there.</p>

<p>“Bad news!” cried Jack, and seized me, while Ben
picked up the letter and the other two came to my side.
“Let me be, Jack—see, I am all right again. Read,
read, Ben, ’tis bad news indeed.”</p>

<p>It was but a short letter from my mother, telling me
that all was well with them, but that three days earlier
two messengers had arrived at Dale’s Field, bringing
a note from Philip Lisle to Rose, saying that he lay
wounded to death in Derbyshire and begging her to go
to him at once. Whereupon, under the escort of the
two messengers, she had set out in obedience to her
father’s dying wish. That was all.</p>

<p>We looked into each other’s faces as Ben finished, and
each saw dismay and fear on the other’s countenance.
“Villainy, villainy,” muttered Jack. “The father is here,
alive and well. Who hath done it?”</p>

<p>So we stood for a moment until Philip Lisle seized my
arm and dragged me from the room. “We must follow!”
said he. “Would God we had known of this three days
ago!” And so presently we were on our horses and
stealing through the enemy’s lines, and once clear of
them we headed for Dale’s Field as fast as our steeds
could carry us.</p>

<h2>XXXIII</h2>

<h3>OF OUR RIDE IN SEARCH OF ROSE</h3>

<p>We rode in silence down the rough lane that leads from
Baghill to Darrington, keeping along the stretch of grass
at the wayside as much as possible, so that the sound of
our horses’ feet might be deadened. Down the hill we
went into Darrington, and past the cross-roads, where
two or three men still lingered at the door of the inn
and watched us curiously as we sped along. All that
time we had spoken no word, but both of us were full
of rage and horror at the news brought to us by Belwether.
I had ridden out at first half dazed at the
strange tidings, comprehending nothing but that my
dear love was in sore danger, and that I must go to her
assistance. But as my head cleared with the long
gallop I began to think of what the bad news meant.
Rose had been entrapped and carried away. It was a
snare meant for no good. Who had done it? Who
had done it? Over and over again this question came
into my head as we rode forward under the starlit sky.</p>

<p>“Whose hand is this, Will?” asked Philip Lisle at
last, just as we came in sight of the lights at Dale’s
Field. “I did not know that my poor girl had an
enemy—nor that I had either, for that matter.”</p>

<p>“I cannot understand it,” I answered, and said no
more, knowing not what to say. And yet there was a
suspicion in my mind that I might have spoken of to
him if I had not felt some reluctance in coming to a
decision about it. I tried to put it from me, hating
even to think evil without due cause, but strive as I
would the suspicion grew stronger, and at last I found
myself thinking of it seriously.</p>

<p>Captain Trevor—was it his hand that had brought us
all this wrong? Do what I would I could not help but
suspect him. He had been so frank and courteous, and
had seemed so gallant and true a cavalier, that it went
through my heart to think wrong of him. And yet I
knew the ways of some of those fine gentlemen of the
Court, how they think that all is fair in love and war,
and will stoop to such deceit to win a fair maiden as
they would not condescend to for aught else. I knew,
too, because of his own confession, that Captain Trevor
had conceived a deep passion for Rose, and it seemed
to me very possible that absence from her had so
strengthened his feelings as to render him forgetful of
honour or of aught else save a desire to win her for
himself. But it was hard to believe, for I could not
think that one who had experienced so much kindness
at the hands of me and mine would repay us by such
base ingratitude and black treachery. Where else,
however, to look for an explanation of this strange matter
I knew not. Of one thing only I was certain, namely,
that whoever had thus compassed evil against me and
my dear love should pay for it with his blood.</p>

<p>The lights were being extinguished as we rode into the
fold at Dale’s Field, for it was late, and we were always
early to bed at our house. The window of the chamber
occupied by Lucy and Rose was dark and cheerless, but
there was a glow of light through the window of the
kitchen, and we had barely knocked at the door before
my mother opened it and gave us admittance.</p>

<p>“My dear,” said she, holding me very close in her
arms, for I had not seen her for some weeks, “my dear,
we had not thought to see you at this time of night!
It was only this afternoon that I sent you a letter by the
hand of Master Belwether.”</p>

<p>“Alas, mother!” I answered, it is that very letter that
hath brought us here.”</p>

<p>It was nearly dark in the doorway, and she could not
distinguish my companion’s face through the gloom, but
when I spoke she turned towards him anxiously.</p>

<p>“Who is it that is come with you, Will?” she said.</p>

<p>“It is I, Mistress Dale,” answered Philip.</p>

<p>“Master Lisle! Alas, I fear there is something wrong.
Let us have a light, Will. I feared something when I
heard your step at the door.”</p>

<p>I struck a light from the flint that always hung by the
hearth, while Philip tied up our horses at the door, and
threw our rugs across their steaming backs. The light
from the lamp fell on our three anxious faces as we
gathered round the dying embers.</p>

<p>“What is it, Will?” asked my mother.</p>

<p>“It is this, dear mother. Here is Master Lisle alive
and well, and hath had no hurt whatever of late, so that
the men who have carried off Rose to see him have
deceived both her and you.”</p>

<p>She looked from me to him and from him to me, as if
she could hardly understand what I had told her.</p>

<p>“Alas, Master Lisle,” she said, “I have been very,
very foolish—but, indeed, what were we to think, for the
men were so very grave and earnest? And then, again,
they brought a letter from yourself, so that we could not
choose but believe them.”</p>

<p>“The letter, mother; let us see the letter.”</p>

<p>“Why, by good chance, Rose left it behind her, though
she had at first intended to carry it with her,” said my
mother, “and Lucy put it away after she had gone.
But indeed, Master Lisle, ’tis so like your own
handwriting that you will not wonder we were deceived
by it.”</p>

<p>Nor did we when we had seen the letter, for it was
very cleverly made to imitate Philip’s writing, so that we
at once knew that whoever had hatched this foul plot
was familiar with the man whose daughter it sought to
injure. It was but a short letter, saying that Philip
Lisle lay sick unto death at a day’s journey, and desired
his daughter to go to him under care of the two trusty
messengers who carried it.</p>

<p>“And these,” said my mother, “were two decent-looking
serving-men, one of whom told us that he had known
Master Lisle a many years, and was with him at the
time of his hurt, which had been gotten during a
fight with the rebels on the borders of Derbyshire where
he now lay dying. And they were both so full of pity
for Rose, and made so many compassionate remarks
concerning her father, that we had none of us any
suspicion of them, but regarded them as being what they
professed to be.”</p>

<p>So now we knew all that my mother could tell us, and
there was nothing for us to do but resolve upon some
plan of action.</p>

<p>“They have three days’ start of us,” said Philip sadly.
“And the land is wide enough for them to have gone in
many a different direction before we can have news of
them. However, we must to horse, Will, and do what
we can to find my poor girl.”</p>

<p>“Which way shall we go?” I asked, feeling almost
hopeless, so black did matters look.</p>

<p>“It was nine in the morning when they started out,”
said my mother, “and they rode southward, going
towards Sheffield, whereabouts, they said, Master Lisle
lay dying.”</p>

<p>“Then towards Sheffield we must ride,” said Philip,
“asking for tidings of them as we go along. Pray God
we may be successful!”</p>

<p>We did not tarry long at Dale’s Field, save to eat a
hasty meal and to put some food in our saddle-bags,
and soon we were in the saddle again and hastening
through the night along the Great North Road. The
toll-keeper at Barnsdale Bar was hard and fast asleep,
but we roused him at last and made inquiry of him as to
the three travellers we sought. His brains were somewhat
confused at first, but after a while he remembered
the three we spoke of, and told us they had gone forward
without saying aught to him of their destination. Thus
far we were right, and so we continued until we came
near Doncaster, several toll-bar men and innkeepers
remembering Rose and the two messengers passing
that way.</p>

<p>“We are like to spend a good deal of time without
result in Doncaster,” said Philip. “There are so many
inns in the place, and when we have found the right
one, there are so many various roads to choose from.
How shall we find what road they have taken after
passing through here, if, indeed, they have not turned
aside before coming to the town?”</p>

<p>But I thought and said that the men, whatever their
design might be, would have taken Rose towards Sheffield
for the reason that she knew whither they intended
professedly to conduct her and would have become
suspicious if they had turned their horses’ heads in any
other direction. And my conclusions in this matter
proved correct, for we had little difficulty in finding
news of them at Doncaster, where they had rested to
bait their horses, afterwards resuming their journey
towards Sheffield by the road that leads past
Conisbrough and Rotherham. Along this road, then, we
continued our pursuit, inquiring at every inn and
tollbar for news, which we sometimes got and sometimes
failed to procure.</p>

<p>Now, it had been on my mind ever since leaving
Dale’s Field to tell Philip Lisle of my suspicions
respecting Captain Trevor, and I had only been held
back from doing so by fear of unjustly coupling an
honest man’s name with dishonourable conduct. But
at last it seemed to me well to let Philip know of all
that was in my mind, so when we stayed at Conisbrough
to breathe our horses I took him aside and unbosomed
myself, asking him to tell me candidly what he thought
of the matter.</p>

<p>“Alas, Will,” said he, “I know not what to think.
I know little of this Trevor, except that he hath been
a brave officer and was formerly much about the Court
in London. But, as thou knowest, these gallants are
not always to be trusted, however brave they may be in
battle, and ’tis possible that he hath done this, more
especially as you sayhe conceived some passion for Rose
before he left you. Nay, I know not what to say. We
can only push our journey forward.”</p>

<p>So we went on towards Sheffield, now and then
finding someone who remembered the passing of the
three we sought. It was now afternoon, and our horses,
which had been almost continually on the stretch since
ten o’clock of the previous evening, were beginning to
show signs of fatigue. We had not put them to any
great amount of exertion, for we had spent much time
in making inquiry at the roadside inns and toll-bars,
but the day was exceedingly hot and they had had no
proper rest or feed since leaving Pontefract Castle, where
their rations had been none of the best for weeks past.
At the next wayside inn, then, which stood halfway
between Thrybergh and Rotherham, we drew rein and
stabled our steeds, after which we entered the house to
find some food for ourselves.</p>

<p>We had hardly entered the kitchen of the inn, when I
suddenly started with surprise to see Dennis Watson,
seated in company with another man, who was evidently
a cattle-drover, at a little table near the window. But
as I knew that the Watsons did something in the way of
cattle-dealing in those parts, I reflected that Dennis was
probably there on his own business, and went forward to
another part of the kitchen, taking no more notice of
him than to give him a cold nod of my head. While
Philip and myself were resting and drinking, he and the
drover completed their business, and the latter, having
received some money from Dennis, shortly bade us all
good-day and went out. Dennis continued to sit and
stare at us, bestowing the greater part of his attention
on Philip Lisle, and after a time, when we gave signs of
moving, he came over to the table where we sat and
spoke to me.</p>

<p>“I would like to speak a word to you, Master Dale,”
said he, bending over the table with his eyes fixed on
mine.</p>

<p>“You can speak,” I said, little caring what he had to
say, and not desirous of having aught to do with him.</p>

<p>“I don’t speak before strangers,” said he.</p>

<p>“I have no secrets from my companion,” replied I.
“And I would just as soon there was someone heard
what we have to say, Master Watson.”</p>

<p>His face grew dark when I said that, and he stood
frowning at us both for a full minute before he spoke
again.</p>

<p>“As you like,” he said at last. “I only wished to say,
Master Dale, that I am sorry for you.”</p>

<p>“And for what?” said I sharply.</p>

<p>“Why, because you have lost your sweetheart.”</p>

<p>Now, it did not strike me at first that his words had
any special significance, for I thought that he had heard
that Rose was gone away and was simply taking occasion
of the fact to sneer at me. So I said naught, but sat
silent, looking, I dare say, very stupid and sullen.</p>

<p>“I suppose,” he continued, “that you two gentlemen
are in search of the young lady, and if you are, ’tis a pity
they have three days’ start of you.”</p>

<p>“They—who?”</p>

<p>“Mistress Rose and the gay gallant that your good
mother nursed back to health. It had been better if she
had let him die of his wound, Master Dale.”</p>

<p>When he said this all the blood in my body rushed to
my heart and thence to my head, and I felt a great
singing about my ears as if I were going down in the
midst of some whirlpool. And then I shouted, “Liar!”
and would have leapt at Dennis and choked the sneering
laugh that rose to his lips, but for Philip Lisle, who
laid his hand upon me and restrained me forcibly.</p>

<p>“Let be, Will, let be!” said Philip. “We will soon
know whether he be a liar or not. Now, sir, he continued,
turning to Dennis, “I am the father of Mistress
Rose Lisle, and must ask you to explain yourself further.
Where is it that you have seen my daughter, and in
whose company?”</p>

<p>“Why, Master Lisle,” answered Dennis, “I do not
know that I am bound to explain matters to you.
However, I am no liar, as Master Dale there would make out.
It would be better for him if I were.”</p>

<p>“Go on, sir, go on,” said Philip.</p>

<p>“Well, then, here I am in this part of the land, buying
hogs, as is my custom at this time o’ year, as Will Dale
there knows. Three days ago I was on the high-road
’twixt here and Sheffield, when I saw four travellers
approach, two of whom rode in front while the other two
brought up the rear. I thought I recognised Mistress
Rose Lisle as one of the first, and slipped amongst the
trees to watch. Mistress Rose it was, and with her,
laughing and jesting, the gay cavalier who stayed so
long at Dale’s Field. The others were decent-looking
serving-men of a certain age.”</p>

<p>“If you met such on the road, sir, they passed here.
The host will remember them. Call him in.”</p>

<p>The host did remember such a company. Nay, he
remembered more; the young lady came there with the
serving-men, and was there met by the cavalier, all four
then proceeding southward.</p>

<p>“I am no liar, Master Dale,” said Dennis.</p>

<p>We went outside to our horses. What I felt I cannot
describe. My heart and brain were on fire. I knew not
what to think nor what to do.</p>

<p>“What do you think, what do you think!” I cried to
Philip when we were out of the house. “For God’s sake
say something to me.”</p>

<p>“My poor lad, what can I say? Only this, Will, that
my dear girl would do naught against honour. She is
the victim of some foul plot. Listen. This Trevor hath
a country estate in the north of Derbyshire. Let us
push on through Sheffield and see if we can find him
there.”</p>

<p>So we paid our reckoning and rode away in the
summer evening, and my heart was as heavy as lead
within my breast.</p>

<h2>XXXIV</h2>

<h3>OF OUR ADVENTURE IN DERBYSHIRE</h3>

<p>We came shortly into Rotherham, where we found men
busily engaged in the casting of cannon for the
Parliamentarians, and on that account we tarried there but
a short time, and succeeded not in learning any news of
the party we sought. Neither did we hear much as we
passed along the road betwixt that town and Sheffield,
for we were now come into a more populous district, and
the folks at the inns and toll-bars more than once told
us that they had something else to do than observe what
manner of travellers passed along the highways. Now
and then, indeed, we came across an innkeeper or a
toll-bar man who had some vague and misty notion that he
remembered the company we described, but the answers
of these people were usually so little to be depended upon
that we could put no confidence in them.</p>

<p>“There is nothing for it, Will, but to push on towards
Trevor’s estate, which lieth, I know, somewhere in the
Peak country,” said Philip Lisle. “We shall most likely
find him there, and can then make strict inquiry of
him.”</p>

<p>“It shall be but a short inquiry,” I said meaningly, for
I was by that time sure that the man whom we had
befriended had wrought me this great wrong, and my
heart burned to have him by the throat. “Only let me
lay hands upon him and we will have the truth out of
him whether he will or no.”</p>

<p>“Justice shall be done,” said Philip; and we rode on
again in silence, for I had no mind to talk, being chiefly
concerned with fierce thoughts of revenge and anger.
My brain was on fire with these things, and I think that
if Captain Trevor had suddenly appeared before us I
should have slain him where he stood, without giving
him the chance to beg for mercy.</p>

<p>It was well on in the evening when we came into
Sheffield, for during the last few miles our horses had
advanced at little more than a foot-pace. The poor beasts,
in fact, were in anything but fit condition for a long day’s
journey, being worn nearly to skin and bone by their
privations and long fastings. It was abundantly evident
that they could not go further without a rest, for the
hour’s baiting they had already enjoyed at the wayside
inn where we met Dennis Watson had done little more
than spur them on to a brief effort, which was now at
an end.</p>

<p>“We must dismount for a few hours, Will,” said
Philip, “otherwise our cattle will go dead lame. My
poor Cæsar is not so young as he was, and I do not like
to distress him. It is now seven o’clock; what say you
if we dismount until midnight?”</p>

<p>It seemed a long time to me, for I was raging to push
forward anywhere and anyhow, if only I could get news
of my dear Rose Lisle, but I knew that we could do no
less than he proposed. I had hoped we might get some
news of her in Sheffield, but when we rode into it I
found it to be a place larger than Pontefract, with
many inns, and filled with smoke, coming from the
furnaces of workers in iron and steel, so that I cared not
how soon we got away from the bad air and clanking
hammers.</p>

<p>“Mind what you do or say here, Will,” said Philip.
“I fear we are amongst Roundheads in this place, and
I have no mind to experience such treatment as we met
in Pontefract market-place, when old Master Pratt
clapped us into his cellar. I know of a place where
they are true to the King, so we will make for that and
be safe until our horses are rested.”</p>

<p>We accordingly passed through the town, not entirely
unobserved, and finally drew rein at a hostelry which
stood in a retired situation over against the road which
leads from Yorkshire into Derbyshire. Here we found
an ancient landlord, who greeted Philip Lisle very
cordially and bade us welcome. But neither he nor
his could tell us aught of Rose, so we were fain to stable
our steeds and sit down to wait with what patience we
could. They set meat and drink before us, but neither
felt inclined for eating, and I think a mouthful of bread
would have choked me. At last, indeed, I grew so
restless that I proposed we should go forth and make
inquiry at some of the other inns in the town.</p>

<p>“We should surely do as well occupied in that fashion
as sitting here doing naught,” said I; “and as for me, I
can bear this idleness no longer, and shall go mad if I
am not occupied.”</p>

<p>“Agreed,” said Philip; and we set out into the town
and proceeded as cautiously as possible to make inquiries
at such inns as travellers usually put up at. No news,
however, did we hear, and received many a scolding for
our foolishness in asking folks to remember what had
happened four days before. They had too much to do,
said all that we spoke to, to remember every stray party
that paused to water their horses. So we did no good
in that direction, and presently returned to our own inn,
which we left shortly after midnight, the horses being
somewhat recovered by their rest and rations.</p>

<p>It was a bright moonlight night, and the country to
the west, which we were now traversing, rapidly assumed
shapes and forms with which until then I had never been
familiar. The ground began to rise until it was shaped
in high hills, more or less steep, with long valleys, now
wooded and now barren, winding away between them.
To my eyes, which had never seen aught higher than
the hills at Brayton and Hambleton, nor any valley
wider than that of Went, this scenery was very awful,
and brought over me a curious feeling of admiration
and wonder. It was so silent and lonely, with no sound
save the clank of our horses’ feet, or the clatter of our
swords against the stirrup-irons, and the clouds that
floated over the moonlit hills looked so weird and
ghostly, that I could almost have imagined myself in
some of the fairy haunts that I had heard folks talk
about.</p>

<p>Through these dales and over the passes that cross
the surrounding hills we rode for some hours until we
had climbed over Derwent Edge, and were drawing near
to the country round the Peak. Here the hills assumed
rougher and wilder shapes, and the valleys became
deeper and darker. Presently the road along which we
had ridden became less well defined, and we found
ourselves traversing what was little more than a
bridlepath that wound up and down the hillsides. It was now
morning, and the sun was rising above the hills to the
westward, and our horses once more began to show signs
of fatigue. However, I could see nothing in the shape
of human habitation whichever way I turned.</p>

<p>“It seems as if we had lost our way,” I said, drawing
rein until Philip Lisle came abreast of me. “The path
grows narrower and narrower, and bids fair to be lost
altogether presently.”</p>

<p>“I have been this way once before,” said he, pulling
up his horse and looking round, “and it runs in my
mind that there is a farmstead close by. Let us push
on over yonder hill and see if we cannot discover it.”</p>

<p>When we came to the top of the high ground he had
pointed out, the farmstead lay exactly beneath us—a
lonely and desolate-looking group of buildings, round
which I could see no sign of life. On the steep
hillsides that rose about it a few mountain sheep strayed
hither and thither, but there were no cattle in the
valley, and no smoke came from the chimneys of the
house.</p>

<p>“It looks as if its inhabitants were all gone to the wars,
Will,” said Philip Lisle, as we descended the hillside and
drew near to the house. “Nevertheless, it shall go hard
with us if we cannot find something for our horses.
This used to be a house of call for travellers twenty
years ago.”</p>

<p>When we came up to the door of the house and
knocked loudly thereon we received no answer for some
time, and were thus obliged to come to the conclusion
that the place was deserted, which idea was strengthened
when we saw that the farmyard was empty, and that
there was no fodder in any of the barns or sheds. The
out-buildings, indeed, were falling to pieces, the damp
and the dry rot having conspired to finish them off, both
inside and out. From what we could see of the house
through the dirty windows, it was in a similar state, and
looked as if it had no tenants other than rats, mice, and
vermin.</p>

<p>We were turning away from this uninviting place,
when we heard the sound of a bolt being withdrawn
from its staple, followed by the rattling of a chain, and
presently the door was opened to us by a tall old man
who looked more like a wild animal than a human
being, so fiercely did his eyes glare through the knotted
and tangled mass of hair which grew all over his face.
He was clothed in little better than rags, and his arms
and feet were bare, while his shoulders—which he
shrugged as if he were cold, though it was a fine warm
summer morning—were covered with a sheep-skin
rudely dressed, and left with the feet and tail still
hanging to it.</p>

<p>“God save you, master!” said Philip, drawing nearer
to the door. “This was a house of call, an I mistake not,
in former days.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” said the old man, whose fierce eyes were
examining our persons and our horses as if he had never
seen aught like us before. “Yes, yes; do your horses
want a feed? I am very poor, but there is a little corn
in the stables.”</p>

<p>“Then they shall have it,” said Philip. “Come, Will,
let us dismount. The cattle will be all the better for an
hour’s rest. Your homestead does not seem to be in
very good condition, master,” he continued as the old
man went before into the stable. “What hath happened
here of late?”</p>

<p>“It was robbed, robbed,” piped the old man in his
cracked voice. “Those Roundhead knaves sacked it of
all I had—grain and straw. Pray God ye be not of their
following!”</p>

<p>“Nay, we are for the King,” said Philip, “and will pay
handsomely for whatever we eat. Have you no food or
drink for us, master, as well as for our horses?”</p>

<p>“There is a little ale, just a little,” said the old man,
“and some cheese and bread, if that will content you,
gentlemen. Once upon a time travellers fared well with
me, but, alas! I have naught left for myself nowadays,
save yonder two or three sheep which I am too infirm to
catch.”</p>

<p>While we had been talking he had led the way to a
stable which was somewhat less dilapidated than the
rest of the buildings, and was fairly well fitted with two
stalls, in which we placed our horses. This done, he
produced a feed of corn for each from a bin that stood
in the corner, afterwards going before us back to the
house.</p>

<p>“Come in, noble gentlemen, come in,” said he as we
reached the threshold. “ ’Tis a poor place, but if you
will pass through the kitchen you will find a parlour
more suited to your quality. ’Tis indeed the only
apartment in the house where I can entertain you,
for all else hath been cleared off.”</p>

<p>We went through the desolate-looking kitchen into a
smaller apartment, wherein the sole furniture consisted
of a deal table and two or three rough chairs.</p>

<p>“Marry!” quoth Philip. “You seem to have fallen on
sore times, friend, of late years.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” said the old man. “Yes, sore indeed—but
you need refreshment, gentlemen. I will bring you what
I have. It is not often that travellers pass this way
nowadays.”</p>

<p>He presently returned and set before us a platter of
bread and cheese and a great jug of ale, the sight of
which was not unwelcome to us, sharp set as we were by
our long ride through the night.</p>

<p>“You have a deep cellar, master,” said Philip, tossing
off his pot at a draught. “Your ale is cold as an
icicle.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said the old man, “deep enough, but poorly
furnished, sir, since all these troubles came upon me.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said Philip, “these be troublous times, ’tis true.
Tell us, master, do you know where the estate of one
Captain Trevor, an officer in his Majesty’s forces, lieth?
It is somewhat near the Peak, so I have heard, and we
are now in that neighbourhood, if I mistake not.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” answered the old man, “you are now at the foot
of the Peak, and Squire Trevor’s estate lieth before you
at a distance of seven miles. Follow this bridle-path
along the valley until you come to the road again, and
then ride straight on till you reach the park gates.”</p>

<p>“Have you seen aught of Captain Trevor lately?”
inquired Philip. “Is he much seen in these parts?”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said the old man, “not since the war began,
gentlemen. But I see you have drunk all the ale–shall
I fetch you another stoupful?”</p>

<p>“Why,” said Philip, “I am certainly thirsty this
morning, so fill up again, master, and then you might give
our horses a drink of water. I dare say the poor brutes
are as dry as their riders.”</p>

<p>We continued eating and drinking while the old man
went out to the stables. I ate little, being in no frame
of mind for food, but I had grown strangely thirsty since
leaving my horse, and took deep draughts of the ale,
which was cool and refreshing.</p>

<p>“Beshrew me, Will,” said Philip Lisle suddenly, “I
have turned vastly sleepy since we halted. My eyes
keep winking against my will.”</p>

<p>“So do mine,” I answered. “I have nodded more than
once since we sat down. ’Tis the long ride through the
fresh air.”</p>

<p>“Bethink thee, lad,” said he, “we have had no sleep
these two nights. ’Tis hard work to go without sleep,
and ride all the time too. Indeed, I could lay my head
down on this table and be off in—”</p>

<p>Now, before he had finished speaking he leaned
forward, and, resting his head on his arms, dropped
suddenly off into a sound slumber. I leaned my head
against the wall and watched him. There was a bee
humming outside. Its monotonous buzz, buzz, buzz,
sounded pleasantly in my ears. My eyes closed gently,
and I was suddenly as sound asleep in my corner of the
wall as Philip Lisle with his head on the table.</p>

<p>How long we slept I cannot tell, but I suddenly woke
with a start to find myself lying on the floor of the little
room. It was evidently night, for the light had gone,
and through the window I could see a star peeping over
the top of the hill which towered up above the house.
My head ached in terrible fashion, and my eyes, having
once opened, continued to blink at the starlight while
my senses were collecting themselves. I suddenly tried
to raise my hand to my head. It was fast bound to my
side! and the other was similarly secured. Then my
senses came back to me rapidly enough and I saw what
foors we had been. The old man had drugged us, and
bound us while we slept, probably to rob and murder us
for the sake of our horses and our money.</p>

<p>I tried to move, and found that I was securely fastened
at shoulders, waist and feet. I could do naught but roll
about, and I turned over, hoping to strike against Philip
in the darkness. I had heard him breathing when my
senses came back to me, and concluded that he must be
somewhere near me and in like plight to myself. But I
had not taken more than two rolls across the floor in the
direction in which I fancied him to be, when I heard
sounds outside the window which made me hold my
breath and lie as motionless as a log of timber.</p>

<h2>XXXV</h2>

<h3>OF OUR FORTUNATE MEETING WITH CAPTAIN TREVOR</h3>

<p>The noise I heard outside the house was caused by the
trampling of a horse’s feet on the pavement in front of
the door, followed by the jingling of steel and harness as
the rider alighted. Then came the sound of footsteps on
the threshold, and a man’s voice said, “Hollo, there!
what, is the old knave asleep?”</p>

<p>“Nay, nay, noble captain, nay; did you ever know me
to fall asleep when there was grist to bring to the mill?
But speak low, captain dear, for there is somewhat inside
that must not be waked.”</p>

<p>“Ah, and what is it this time, Benny? A fine fat
Sheffield merchant? Will he bleed well?”</p>

<p>“Nay, nay,” quavered the old man. “ ’Tis two of those
accursed Cavaliers⁠—Heaven’s malediction be upon all
of their sort!—that came wandering by this morning.”</p>

<p>“Ah! and drank of thy ale, eh, Benny?”</p>

<p>“Yes, and deeply, I assure you. Oh, I made it strong
enough. But now hark ye, captain dear, there are two
of them, and one is a great giant of a fellow, yea, head
and shoulders taller than Long Dick, but more wooden-headed,
I warrant, for he never spoke a word and let his
companion do all the talking—oh, a great fellow, but
stupid enough.”</p>

<p>“Ay, and the other?”</p>

<p>“Why, the other is an ordinary being, and methinks I
have seen him before somewhere. Perhaps it was—“</p>

<p>“Ay, but hast drawn their teeth, Benny?”</p>

<p>“Yes, indeed, captain dear, oh yes. Their swords and
pistols are safe stowed, I warrant you.”</p>

<p>“Well, and the booty? You searched them, of course,
when they were safe and sound?”</p>

<p>“Yes, and bound,” said the old man. “The great man
had thirty guineas in a bag, and a breeches pocket full
of crown pieces; and the other had twenty guineas, but
no silver. Then there are their horses safely bestowed
in the stable, and their trappings, and the men’s clothes
and arms, so that old Benny hath not done so bad a
day’s work, eh, captain?”</p>

<p>“Excellent, Benny, excellent. And the money, my
cock of Egypt, where hast bestowed it?”</p>

<p>“In the usual place, captain dear; oh, in the usual
place,” said the old villain, with so much craft and
subtlety in his voice that I could almost see his rascally
old eyes glinting and gleaming through his white hair.</p>

<p>“Well, but what are we to do with the fellows,
Benny?” asked the other man. “The usual thing—four
inches of cold steel, and drop them into the well?”</p>

<p>“I should have done it before now,” said the old man;
“but the big man is too heavy for me to drag, and then I
might have been seen from the hillsides. Shall we do it
now, captain dear?”</p>

<p>“Why, is there any hurry, Benny? Will the fellows
wake soon? “</p>

<p>“Not they,” laughed the old man. “Not this side of
Doomsday, I warrant me.”</p>

<p>“Why, then, let me eat and drink, Benny, and then
we will do the necessary deed. Besides, there is Long
Dick coming up the valley, and he can bear us a hand if
need be. So set out meat and drink, my Trojan, while
I stable my steed. Fifty guineas, quotha? ’Tis well,
Benny, excellent well.”</p>

<p>Then the sound of horses’ feet went across the yard,
and I heard the old man moving about with pots and
pans in some apartment next to our own. As for me, a
great sweat had sprung out all over me when I heard
these bloody murderers so calmly discussing our fate.
What was to be done? There I was, tied hand and foot
so that I could not move, and Philip Lisle lay still sound
asleep at my side, equally powerless with myself. If
only I could have freed myself from the ropes which
bound me, I would have risen and gone forth, and then
and there screwed the old man’s head round until his
further chance of maltreating travellers had been gone.
But there I was, big enough and strong enough to fight
three men of ordinary size, and yet helpless as a child
because my arms were tied.</p>

<p>Presently the other man came back from stabling his
horse, and I heard the two conversing in low tones in
the next room. I heard, also, the clatter of dishes, and
wished fervently that the food would choke them both.
I thought of all manner of things in those dreadful
moments—of my mother, of Rose, of Jack Drumbleforth
and Jacob Trusty, of Lucy and Ben Tuckett, and
of matters which had happened many a year before and
had been forgotten until then. I could see no possible
way of escape. Presently the men would come in and
run their knives into us, with no more compunction
than if we had been sheep, and after that they would
throw us into the old well, and leave us to rot. I would
have given all I had in the world for the use of my
arms at that terrible moment.</p>

<p>After what seemed a long time I heard another
horse enter the yard in front, and presently a third
voice was joined to the two already engaged in
conversation. Then the sweat came out on my brow in great
beads, and at every sound as of feet coming our way I
trembled with anger and helpless rage. I strained at
the cords that bound me, and felt them nip the flesh
beneath.</p>

<p>And then an idea suddenly flashed across my mind
like a ray of hope. I remembered once being at Doncaster
Fair, and watching a man of enormous strength
who was showing the people what he could do with his
muscles and sinews. First of all he lifted weights, such
as bars of iron and lead, and after that he swung heavy
clubs about as if they had been mere willow wands.
But what the people most admired was the following
trick: the man produced a long strand of rope, and
bound it tightly round his chest, after which he drew a
deep breath, and then, sending out his chest to its full
extent, he snapped the rope as if it had been a bit of
straw or a woman’s strand of worsted.</p>

<p>Now, I was at that time as strong and mighty of
muscle and sinew as any man of the age, and I knew
that for every pound the strong man at the fair could
lift, I could lift two. And at this terrible moment it
occurred to me that now was the time to put forth my
great strength and burst the bonds that bound me, so
that I might at least have a blow at the villains in the
next room before they threw me and my companion into
the well.</p>

<p>I contracted my chest and arms as far as I could, and
then suddenly expanded them so that the rope cracked
again under the pressure. But, alas! there were more
strands than one, and they cut into the thick part of
my arms so cruelly that I almost cried out with pain.
Nevertheless, I was spurred on to make another effort by
the voices in the next room, so I drew breath once more,
and once more tried to burst the bonds that bound me.
I strove and strove and strove until the fire flashed from
my eyes, and my chest was like to split, while the
straining cords cut into my arms till the blood started
and the sweat poured down my face. And then with one last
effort the rope snapped sharply, and I sank back
exhausted but free.</p>

<p>But there was no time for rest, and I immediately set
to work to untie the bonds which confined my feet.
This done, I crept over to where Philip Lisle lay
asleep, and hastened to release him also. He was so
soundly wrapped in slumber that all my tugging at his
bonds and rolling him about did not suffice to wake him,
and I did not dare to shout in his ear lest the men
should hear me. So I withdrew him into the darkest
part of the room, and then stole stealthily over to the
door, with the intention of crushing the life out of the
first man who entered. I had not stood there many
minutes, when I heard very soft footfalls approach the
door, which was presently unbolted from the outside and
then gently opened to the extent of two or three inches.
I held my breath and waited, yet my heart thumped so
violently against my ribs that I feared it would be heard.
However, my hands and arms were ready, and my fingers
twitched to be at somebody’s throat.</p>

<p>Then the door was opened a little wider, and I heard
the old man whispering as if to someone behind him.</p>

<p>“Fast asleep, captain dear, fast asleep! Don’t you
hear how regularly they breathe? Aha, what a nice
sleep they’ll have at the bottom of the old well, eh?
You made the knife sharp enough, captain dear?”</p>

<p>“Sharp as a needle,” growled the other man. “Go in,
Benny, and get it over.”</p>

<p>“Oh yes,” whispered the old villain. “Oh yes, I’m
going. Do you hear them breathing, eh? Like
children. Eh, eh, eh, how the warm blood will bubble
under old Benny’s knife, captain dear! Eh—, sh—sh, my
children—sh, here’s old Benny with his—”</p>

<p>As he came stealthily round the door I seized him by
the throat and drove his head straight and true against
the stone wall behind. I felt the skull crack under my
hand, and the man’s body fell limp and lifeless at my
feet, without ever a sound passing his lips. Then I
caught the glittering knife from him as he fell, and
turned on the other two men, who were crowding into
the doorway after him, and whose forms I could just
make out in the dim light. As I struck out at them
they fell back into the kitchen through which we had
passed in the morning, and I, following them up with
my weapon, was upon them before they could reach the
door. But here I lost the knife, which I drove into the
doorpost with such force that I could not withdraw it.
By that time, however, they had opened the door, and
we all three went rolling out on the stone pavement
with a hideous clatter. But I was topmost, and before
they could rise I had each by the throat and was
wondering if I could manage to squeeze the life out of both
of them at the same time.</p>

<p>Now, they were both big men and of brawny build,
and they no sooner found my hands at their throats
than they began to fight desperately for their lives, so
that one of them presently forced my hand away from
his neck and strove to regain his feet. But my wits
were now thoroughly at work, and as this man forced
my hand away, I raised his fellow-villain’s head with
the other hand and gave it such a knock against the
stones that it cracked like an eggshell, and the man
stiffened out and lay still. The one who had thought
himself free had meanwhile drawn a knife, and I rose
just in time to escape a blow aimed at my back. He
came at me again as I got to my feet, but there
fortunately lay close to hand a thick bar that had once been
used as a swingle-tree, and with this I laid about the
fellow’s head and shoulders to such purpose that he
suddenly dropped his knife and ran howling for mercy
towards the hills.</p>

<p>So now the fight was over, and it had all happened in
very much less time than it has taken me to write down
this account of it. I went into the house, and finding a
lamp burning in a room where the men had evidently
been eating their supper, carried it to Philip, who,
sleeping amidst all the noise and clatter, had just begun
to wake up and rub his eyes.</p>

<p>“Beshrew me, Will!” said he, as I bent over him with
the lamp, “I fear I have slept a longer time than I
thought to. Where are we, and what am I doing on the
floor?”</p>

<p>“Wake up, sir,” said I impatiently. We have been
drugged and wellnigh murdered, and we have lost a
whole day.”</p>

<p>He was on his feet in an instant then, and listened
attentively while I told him what had happened. Then
he took and shook my hand very earnestly.</p>

<p>“Well done, Will, well done indeed!” said he. “Alas!
I am much to blame. We ought to have been more
cautious of that old man. But let us have a look at our
enemies.”</p>

<p>As for the old man, he was dead enough, and I could
not for the life of me feel sorry for him, so villainous
and crafty had been his conduct towards us. The other
fellow lying outside was in bad case too, but not dead,
so we lifted him inside the house and put him into a
comfortable position, after which we left him and began
to hunt for our money, finding it after considerable
search hidden under a flag in the cellar. This done, we
made for the stables, and lost no time in saddling our
horses, for we were both impressed with the idea that
there might be more of these murderers, and that the
third fellow had fled to seek assistance.</p>

<p>When we led the horses out of the stable and mounted
them at the gate, the moon had just risen and the valley
was full of clear, silver light. We were about to ride
away, when we suddenly caught the sound of horsemen
advancing along a bridle-path that lay to the west.
Soon we heard the sound of voices, mingling with the
clank of bit and stirrup, so that we felt sure there was a
troop of horse upon us.</p>

<p>“Draw behind the wall, Will, and let them go by,” said
Philip. “If they are of our own party we will hail
them: if not, we will let them go in peace.”</p>

<p>So we drew behind the wall of the granary, and the
troop came along at a smart walk, and we heard the men
laughing and talking.</p>

<p>“Old Benny’s farmstead,” said one of the foremost,
“is going to rack and ruin. Let us whistle him out.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said another, “let the old fox sleep in his hole.
I had as lief set eyes on the devil as on his evil face.”</p>

<p>“Forward, lads, forward!” cried a voice from the rear.</p>

<p>“We are not making such speed as we ought. Trooper
Baxendale, lead on a little faster.”</p>

<p>Now, I had no sooner heard that voice than I gave a
great start, and would have leaped forward if Philip Lisle
had not held me with a strong hand. For the voice was
the voice of Captain Trevor. “Silence, Will, silence! “
whispered Philip. “Do naught rashly. Leave it to me
and command thyself. See, here he comes.”</p>

<p>And looking out from the barn wall we saw Captain
Trevor distinctly enough in the moonlight, as he rode at
the tail of his little troop of twenty men. He passed by
us, and then Philip rode out into the lane and hailed him.</p>

<p>“Hola! Captain Trevor.”</p>

<p>He turned sharply and stared in our direction, and his
men drew rein and the horses stopped and stood champing
their bits.</p>

<p>“Who calls?” said he, as we drew nearer.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis I, your old acquaintance, Philip Lisle, and here
is with me Will Dale.”</p>

<p>“Master Lisle—and Will Dale, my dear Will Dale!
Gentlemen, indeed I cannot think what brings you into
this wild region, but ’tis for my better fortune, I am
sure.”</p>

<p>And he leapt from his horse and came hastening to
take our hands, and I knew, and was glad to know it,
that the terrible suspicion we had fostered against him
was groundless. But since he was innocent, who was it
that was guilty?</p>

<h2>XXXVI</h2>

<h3>OF THE END OF OUR SEARCH</h3>

<p>“Alas, Will!” whispered Philip, as Captain Trevor
approached us, “we are on the wrong track. This man
is innocent enough. We have been fooled somewhere.”</p>

<p>“And what brings you here, gentlemen?” asked Captain
Trevor, shaking hands with both. “Are you on some
similar mission to my own? I am taking a troop of
horse to Newark—’tis my first adventure, Master Dale,
since I left you.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said Philip, “we are on a sad adventure indeed,
and just now our prospects look black enough. However,
there is one load off our minds, as you shall hear;”
and he forthwith proceeded to give an account of all
that had befallen us from the time that Belwether
brought us the bad news to Pontefract Castle even to
that moment.</p>

<p>Now, while he spoke Captain Trevor gave evidence of
the keenest interest and of the liveliest indignation, and
when Philip Lisle told him of our meeting with Dennis
Watson, and of what Dennis had said respecting him,
his face flushed and his hand grasped the hilt of his
sword in a way that boded no good to his false accuser.</p>

<p>“But you believed him not, gentlemen?” he said
earnestly. “I trust you believed him not. And yet
why have you come here if you did not believe him?
Alas, gentlemen, I should have thought you had known
me better than to believe me guilty of such black
conduct!”</p>

<p>“Sir,” said I, “let me tell you that in my heart I did
not believe it, but there were two witnesses against you,
and we were bound to satisfy ourselves in justice to
ourselves and to you. Besides, we thought it possible that
some terrible mistake had arisen.”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes,” said he; “but, oh, gentlemen, it is you who
have made a terrible mistake. Can you not see, Master
Dale, that the man who so falsely accused me is the man
who hath wrought this mischief?”</p>

<p>“Dennis Watson?”</p>

<p>“Dennis Watson of a surety. Did I not hear, when I
was at Dale’s Field, that he was your enemy and had
more than once vowed to do you an injury? Rest
assured, Master Dale, that it is he who hath planned and
carried out this matter.”</p>

<p>Then I saw what fools we had been, and how easily
Dennis Watson had duped us, and I swore a great oath
that whenever he and I next met, whether in highway or
byway, street or market-place, in church or court, there
one of us two should go forth no more. And that oath
I kept, even as God willed it.</p>

<p>“And now, gentlemen,” said Captain Trevor, “you
must back to yonder wayside inn that you spoke of, for
it is there that you will find the key to this mystery.
Yea, I am convinced that the host who bore out Watson’s
statement is implicated with him in this plot against
you. Now, it will not be so much out of our way to go
with you, for we can make Newark by way of Retford, so
mount, gentlemen, and let us push on.”</p>

<p>“But these men?” said I, pointing towards the farmstead,
which now stood white and clear in the moonlight.
“Shall we not see to the one that is living?”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said Trevor, “his companion will presently
return when he sees us ride away, and we have no time
to attend to cut-throats. I have long known that this
gang needed stamping out, Master Dale, and am obliged
to you for what you have done. So now let us away.”</p>

<p>And with that we got into our saddles and departed,
soon leaving the ruined farmstead far behind; and from
that day to this I have never heard whether the man
died or whether he recovered, nor did I much care,
considering what trouble of mind he and his companions
had put me to.</p>

<p>We rode along through the valleys between the hills
during the whole of that night, and came in sight of
Sheffield about six o’clock in the morning. But into
Sheffield Captain Trevor would not go, because it was
principally in the hands of the Parliamentarians, and we
therefore took a roundabout direction southwards of the
town, and went towards Rotherham by way of Beauchief
Abbey and the villages of Woodhouse and Whiston.
At Rotherham we stayed to bait our horses, it being then
almost noon and the march having lasted nearly twelve
hours. Here we heard news of his Majesty’s success at
Leicester, which was communicated to us by a messenger
going north from Newark. Here, too, we learnt that the
King had expressed his hopes of shortly achieving a
great victory over the Roundheads, which hopes,
however, were unfulfilled, for the battle of Naseby, which
took place a few days later, routed the Royalist army for
ever.</p>

<p>It was about two o’clock in the afternoon when we left
Rotherham and proceeded along the highway in the
direction of Thrybergh. The wayside inn where we had
seen Dennis Watson lay halfway between these two
places, and it was not long before we came in sight of it
and drew up to confer amongst ourselves as to what plan
of action we should pursue.</p>

<p>“Leave it to me,” said Captain Trevor. “If matters
are as I suspect, I will bring them to a successful ending.
Do you, gentlemen, lie behind a little, while I and my
men ride forward. We will call for drink, and while we
are busy with our tankards at the inn-door you will ride
up and presently begin to soundly rate the landlord for
falsely directing you the other day. After which leave
matters to me.”</p>

<p>Acting upon this advice, we let Captain Trevor and his
men ride on until they came to the door of the inn,
where they were presently waited upon by the host,
whom we took to be the man that had lied to us two
days previously. This person brought out to them
stoups of liquor, and while he stood at the door waiting
their pleasure, Philip and I rode forward and suddenly
made our appearance between him and the troopers.
And we had no sooner drawn rein than I perceived that
the fellow instantly recognised us, for he changed colour
and gave a sharp backward look over his shoulder, as
though he contemplated a retreat into the inn.</p>

<p>“How now, sirrah!” cried Philip. “A fine dance you
have given us with your false news. You shall account
to us pretty heavily for it, I promise you.”</p>

<p>“I know not what your worship means,” stammered
the man, beginning to look very much afraid.</p>

<p>“What, hast thou the impudence to say so? Hark ye,
sirrah, did not my friend here and myself call at your
house for refreshment but two days ago?”</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, yes, certainly.”</p>

<p>“And did we not make inquiry of thee, and didst thou
not affirm that a young gentleman and his two servants
had lately met a young lady at this inn and gone forward
with her?”</p>

<p>“Yes, your worship, but ’twas only truth.”</p>

<p>“Hah, truth quotha! And did not Dennis Watson
that was here at the time, and whom I doubt not thou
knowest over-well—did he not tell us in thy hearing that
the young gentleman was one Captain Trevor?”</p>

<p>“I believe Master Watson did say so,” faltered the man
“Yes, I remember it very well.”</p>

<p>“Then thou liest, villain, and so did he,” struck in
Captain Trevor, “for I am the man he spoke of, and it is
months since I rode by thy rascally dwelling. And I
would have you know, sirrah, that I am a magistrate
and bear the King’s commission to put down naughty
conduct such as thine.”</p>

<p>Now, when the man heard this he began to shake
somewhat, but presently, plucking up courage, he replied
that he feared naught, having done no wrong, and that
there was law to protect him as well as another.</p>

<p>“As to what Master Watson said,” he continued, “what
have I to do with it? Did I mention Captain Trevor’s
name? Marry, I never heard it before this day. What
I said, gentlemen, was out of my own knowledge, nor do
I know whether what Master Watson said be true or
not!”</p>

<p>“Master innkeeper,” said Captain Trevor, “thou art a
pitiful liar and a knave. Now, we will tell thee for thy
further information that there hath lately been a young
lady kidnapped, whose friends we are, come hither to
avenge her. And so we are like to have the truth out
of thee, master innkeeper, for we think thou knowest
something of this matter.”</p>

<p>Now, the man by that time was very much affrighted
and began to shake in his limbs, but once more plucking
up courage, he answered that he knew naught of
kidnapping and was not to be bullied by any man.</p>

<p>“What, dost dare answer me, a King’s officer!” cried
Captain Trevor. “Here, men, dismount and seize him!”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis at your peril!” said the man, struggling violently
to free himself from the clutches of the two stalwart
troopers who had seized him on either side.“You have
no warrant to lay hands on me.”</p>

<p>“Warrant or no warrant, thou wilt find we shall treat
thee as we please,” said Captain Trevor. “Come, sirrah,
tell us presently what you know of this Watson that
conspired with you here. And speak trippingly, or we
will find means to help your tongue.”</p>

<p>“You dare not use violence,” said the man, half
struggling between fear of us and defiance of our
presence.</p>

<p>“Dare not? Friend, thou knowest not what thou art
saying.”</p>

<p>“There is law for me as well as anybody,” said the
man.</p>

<p>“Yea, and we are come to execute it. We will be
counsel and jury and judge all in one. Now come,
sirrah, speak.”</p>

<p>But the man did naught but shake his head and
grumble, whereat Captain Trevor bade them bind his
eyes and tie him to his own pump, at the same time
ordering his troopers to make ready their pistols.</p>

<p>“For indeed,” said he, with a roguish wink of the eye
in our direction, “we shall be forced to resort to extreme
measures, master landlord, unless you speak without
more delay.”</p>

<p>Now, the innkeeper’s wife, who had been washing or
baking at the rear of the house, at last came to the
conclusion that there was something wrong at her front
door, wherefore she left her work, and came upon us
just as the men were fastening up the protesting landlord
to the pump. And she, seeing him blindfolded, and the
men standing around him with pistols in their hands,
immediately set up such a screaming that the horses
began to rear and prance.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said Captain Trevor, “there is a more powerful
instrument than any we have used so far. Come,
mistress, an you would not see your husband slaughtered
before your eyes, tell him to speak.”</p>

<p>“Oh, speak, good Gregory, speak, good, kind Gregory!
Oh, masters, spare him! Gregory, dost not hear, thou
wooden-head? Alack-a-day, I knew thou wouldst cause
ill out of yond business, only thou wouldst not hearken
tome. Did I not say ’twas a shame and a sin—and as
sweet and gentle a young lady as ever breathed?”</p>

<p>“Take off the bandage,” said Captain Trevor. “Come,
Master Gregory, we would hear something further about
this young lady. Speak out, man.”</p>

<p>Now, the landlord, having darted a glance at his
spouse which boded her no good, stood angrily regarding
us until a trooper lifted his pistol to his forehead and
touched the trigger, whereupon he suddenly said that he
would lead us to where the young lady was if we would
molest him no further.</p>

<p>“As to that we will promise naught,” said Captain
Trevor, “for thou art in our power. Tie him up with
your halter, Trooper Whiteman, and drive him wherever
he wants us to go.”</p>

<p>Upon this the man set off surlily enough, and we
followed him, Philip and myself anxious and eager now
that we knew Rose was near at hand. The innkeeper
turned into the meadow at the rear of his house, and
crossing it, led us into a thick belt of wood where the
only path was a narrow one, so that we were bound to
ride in single file.</p>

<p>“Come hither, gentlemen,” said Captain Trevor,
dismounting and taking up a position by our prisoner.
“This fellow shall tell us what he knows. Now, sirrah,
speak plainly.”</p>

<p>Thus adjured, the man confessed, with much reluctance,
that himself and another, instigated by Dennis
Watson, had brought away a young lady from Dale’s
Field, and had secured her in a lonely house beyond the
belt of wood we were now approaching, where she had
since been guarded by the other man and his wife.</p>

<p>“But, indeed, gentlemen,” he said in conclusion,
“indeed there hath no harm befallen the maiden, and
no insult hath been offered her. Of a surety I should
not have meddled with the matter if there had been
aught evil. Nay, Master Watson did warrant us ’twas
naught but a love affair, and that he was rescuing the
young lady—”</p>

<p>“Hold thy tongue, sirrah!” commanded Captain
Trevor. “A villainous pack are ye all, and shall be
punished soundly for your pains. Is yond the house
thou speak’st of, sirrah?”</p>

<p>The man answered humbly enough that it was, and we
filed out of the wood and went across a clearing towards
it. But we had not gotten within fifty paces of it, when
one of our vanguard cried out that there was a man
escaping from the house into the fields beyond, and at
the same moment another announced the flight of a
woman in another direction.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis Tom Porter and his wife,” said our guide.
“They have seen us coming and are fleeing for their
lives.”</p>

<p>“A crown piece to the men who first lay hands on
them,” said Captain Trevor, and forthwith the leading
troopers went galloping over hedge and ditch after the
fugitives, while the rest of us went on to the house.</p>

<p>And now I need hardly tell you with what joy Philip
Lisle and myself found our dear Rose, who was busy
unfastening the door when we reached the house, her
gaolers having left her when they saw us approaching.
Then our terrible anxiety was relieved, for she hastened
to assure us that she was no worse for her adventures,
and had kept up her courage by telling herself that we
should ere long come to her assistance.</p>

<p>Now, by that time the soldiers had brought back the
man and woman, and Captain Trevor and I went out to
them, leaving Rose with her father.</p>

<p>“What shall we do with these knaves, Master Dale?”
said Captain Trevor. “We cannot whip the woman, so
let her go, men. But as for you, master innkeeper,
and you, master innkeeper’s brother villain, we will
make you dance to such a tune as you ne’er heard
before.”</p>

<p>And with that he caused his men to tie the two
men up to a stout oak, one on each side, and having
stripped them to their waists, the troopers gave them
such a sound thrashing with their halters that the wood
re-echoed with their unheeded cries for mercy. But I
regretted very deeply that Dennis Watson was not there to
settle his account with me, which I would have exacted
of him in a still more stringent fashion.</p>

<h2>XXXVII</h2>

<h3>OF OUR VISIT TO CASTLE HILL</h3>

<p>When we had sufficiently rewarded master innkeeper
and his companion in villainy according to their several
deserts, we thought it time to be moving on our way,
and one of the troopers fetched Rose’s horse from the
inn, where it had been stabled during her imprisonment.
So presently Philip Lisle brought her forth, ready for
the ride, and we departed, assuring the two men whom
we left tied to the tree that we had not yet done with
them, but would see that the law punished them for
their naughtiness in proper fashion.</p>

<p>“And as to your master and instigator,” said Captain
Trevor, “tell him, when he returns hither, that it will
be an ill day for him if we come across his path. For
what we have done to you is naught to what we will
do to him.”</p>

<p>Now, I was in fiery haste to return to Dale’s Field,
because the men had told us in response to our questions
that Dennis Watson had gone homewards only
that morning, promising to return in two days at the
latest. When I heard that, I was resolved to seek him at
his own place, and there settle matters between us once
for all, and with this object in view I spurred on my
companions so that I might get the business over.
Captain Trevor, however, was of opinion that the best
way to catch Dennis was to wait for him at the point
where we then were, because, said he, the villain was
certain to return to that place, whereas he might get
wind of our coming to Castle Hill and give us the slip.
But I was not willing to take this counsel, arguing
rather that it would be better to proceed straight to the
Watsons’ farmstead, where Dennis would certainly be
found that day. So we proceeded towards Doncaster,
to which town Captain Trevor and his men accompanied
us, and as we journeyed thither Rose told us
of how she had fared since the day she left Dale’s
Field, which history did but serve to increase my great
anger against Dennis Watson.</p>

<p>When the two serving-men, who were none other than
the villains we had just whipped in the wood, presented
themselves at Dale’s Field with the letter from her
father, Rose had not seen reason for doubting their
word, for the letter was cunningly made to represent
Philip Lisle’s handwriting, and the two men wore a
sober and seemly air, and spoke of Philip with much
solicitude and regard. This appearance of concern for
him they kept up, she said, as they accompanied her
along the road, telling her how he fared, and giving her
many false accounts of how he had come by his hurt.
For they said that he had come over from Lancashire
with certain troops, and had been engaged in a skirmish
with the Roundheads near the place where they
professed him to be lying wounded, together with much
more falsely invented matter, put into their heads, no
doubt, by the cunning and malice of Dennis Watson. And
at all this news she had no suspicion aroused, because
she did not know of her father’s whereabouts, none of
us having heard from him or Jack Drumbleforth for
some time. Moreover, the two men were so civil in
their behaviour and so constant in their professions of
regard for Philip Lisle that she felt perfectly safe in
their company, and was even thankful to them for the
care they took of her during the journey.</p>

<p>“Alas!” quoth Captain Trevor at this part of Rose’s
story. “An I had known this, Mistress Rose, an hour
ago, we would have given the smooth-tongued knaves a
dozen extra stripes apiece. I cannot abear your foxy
villains that say fine things to your face and are plotting
against you in their hearts. However, we made their
backs smart.”</p>

<p>All went well, continued Rose, until they reached the
wayside inn between Thrybergh and Rotherham, which
was towards the end of the afternoon. When they had
come to this point they informed her that the house
where her father lay was now close at hand, and that
they would stable their horses at the inn, and then
conduct her to it across the fields. Even then she had
felt no suspicion, and followed the men with confidence
to the house in the wood. When they were at the door,
one of the men, namely, the innkeeper, retired, and the
other took her inside and put her in charge of the
woman. Rose now wished to be taken immediately to
her father, but the woman put her off with the excuse
that he had fallen into a deep slumber, from which he
must not be disturbed at that time. After this she
conducted Rose to an apartment and left her, promising
to fetch her to the sick man as soon as he should give
signs of waking. The woman, however, had no sooner
gone away from the chamber than the door opened and
Dennis Watson appeared before her.</p>

<p>Now, it did not at first so much surprise Rose to see
Dennis, because she thought that he had chanced to be
in the neighbourhood and had been made aware of her
father’s condition, and she therefore immediately made
inquiry of him as to Philip Lisle’s health. He answered
this question by assuring her that so far as he knew her
father’s health was in the best of conditions, and begged
her to forgive him for the trick he had played upon her
in order to bring about that meeting. For he was, he
protested, dying with love for her, and believing that all
things were fair in love and war, he had not scrupled to
resort to stratagem to secure her. After which he
renewed his professions and besought her to fly with him
out of the country.</p>

<p>Now, when Rose fully understood how she had been
served, her indignation rose to such a height that she
told her mind very plainly to the villain before her, and
informed him that she now knew him to be a liar and a
very sorry knave, finally commanding him to stand out
of her path and let her go out of his presence, which did
but offend her. At which, she continued, he grew very
red with passion and altered his tune, threatening her
as much as he had formerly coaxed her. For she must
remember, he said, that there was no help for her,
because she was entirely in his power, and could count
on help from no earthly being. Wherefore he bade her
consider matters afresh, and then retired, locking the
door behind him, so that she was a prisoner. In this
way she continued until the next day, seeing no one but
the woman of the house, who brought her food and
waited upon her, and whom she tried to bribe with
promises of reward, but with no effect. Nevertheless,
she did not lose heart, knowing right well that her
friends would come to rescue her sooner or later.</p>

<p>The next day Dennis again appeared before her, and
again made many protestations of his passion for her, to
which she answered that his actions gave the lie to his
words. After that he again resorted to threats, which
she scorned as before, telling him that she did not fear
him and promising him, moreover, sound punishment
for his misdeeds. This caused him to withdraw again,
having first told her that she should be kept in close
confinement until she was more reasonably disposed
towards him. In this way the succeeding days passed,
Rose being strictly guarded by the man and his wife,
while Dennis appeared at least once a day to plead
his evil cause, hoping that the imprisonment would
eventually break his captive’s resolution. But though
Rose became anxious and concerned, she did not cease to
rate him soundly for his misdeeds, and upon the day
previous to our arrival she let him know how much she
abhorred and despised him; whereupon he swore an
oath that he would use foul means if he could do naught
with fair, and bade her take two days to decide whether
she could give him no better answer. After which he
left the house, telling the men that he was going to
Castle Hill and should return on the second day at the
latest.</p>

<p>Now, this story did but serve to increase our
resentment against Dennis Watson, and Captain Trevor
regretted that he could not accompany us homewards
and go with us to do justice upon our enemy. And we
had indeed been glad of his company, and were sorry to
part with him and his men at Doncaster, where they
went southwards to Newark, while we pursued our
journey along the Great North Road.</p>

<p>It was far into the evening when we arrived at Dale’s
Field and gave Rose into the hands of my mother and
Lucy, who were so overjoyed to see her that they laughed
and cried at the same moment, and made a great to-do
in the way of preparing a feast for our refreshment.
But, tired as I was, I had no mind for rest or food until
I had settled my account with Dennis Watson. And,
indeed, I dare say my dear love wondered that I had so
little to say to her at that time, but the truth was that I
was so full of hatred and revenge that I could neither
eat, sit, sleep, nor talk until I had done somewhat to
satisfy my heart. Wherefore we had no sooner arrived
than I sent off one of my men on horseback to
Darrington, bidding him find three trusty friends of mine
there, whom he was to bring back with him on the
instant. While he was gone I went into the yard and
talked with Jacob Trusty, who was very bitter against
the Roundheads that night, a party of them having
ridden into the fold on the previous day and seized two
of my best bullocks.</p>

<p>“Yea, marry,” said Jacob, “and had the assurance to
sing psalms over the poor beasts as they drove them
along the road! Oh, an I had had my old musket I
would have given them a taste of cold lead. For thou
knowest, William, I had meant those bullocks for
Doncaster market, and now, I suppose, they are roast
meat. However, ’tis a world of disappointments.”</p>

<p>Presently my messenger returned from Darrington,
bringing with him my three friends, who were all stout
and sturdy young farmers. I led them into the house,
where Philip Lisle was eating his supper, and to him
and them I shortly explained what I wished to do. To
settle with Dennis Watson, I said, was my affair, and I
desired no man to be with me in the matter. But so
that we might come at him, I proposed to go in a body
to Castle Hill and there oblige him to come forth and
account to me for his doings. And having said this, I
begged my friends to refresh themselves, and meanwhile
I went out and provided my four ploughmen with a stout
cudgel apiece, so that there were nine of us ready to
seek Dennis Watson. Presently, then, we set off, leaving
Jacob Trusty and Timothy Grass looking wistfully after
us, for they would have much liked to go with us but for
their increasing infirmities.</p>

<p>Now, the farm at Castle Hill lieth beyond the Stapleton
woods on a rising ground half-way between Darrington
and Kirk Smeaton. Why it is called Castle Hill
I know not, unless it is because there was at some
time a fortified tower on the spot where now stands the
farmstead tenanted by the Watsons. It is a lonely
place, being surrounded by deep woods, and the house
itself is old and gloomy and here and there in a ruinous
state. As we left the woods and drew near to it that
night, the moon shone clearly on its roofs and chimneys
and lighted us beneath the trees to the door. There
was no light to be seen in any of the windows, and we
saw no men about the yard, so that the whole place
looked deserted and dreary.</p>

<p>We left our little force within easy call, while Philip
and I went up to the door and knocked loudly at it.
The noise echoed through the house inside with a hollow
and empty sound, and no one answered our summons.
We had knocked three times in this way and received no
response, when an old woman came round the corner of
the house and asked fearfully what we wanted.</p>

<p>“We want Master Dennis Watson,” I answered.
“Where is he, dame?”</p>

<p>“Alack, master!” she answered; “that I cannot say.
He was here this morning, yea, indeed, but he rode
away before noon, and since then his father hath been
well-nigh mad, so that I pray you go your ways, lest he
come out and do you an injury.”</p>

<p>But at that moment the door was flung open and
Rupert Watson himself appeared on the threshold, a
tall, weird-looking figure with white hair and beard. I
had not seen him for many a year, and it startled me to
see the change that had come over him, for in former
days he had been a sturdy, square-shouldered man, but
now was old and somewhat bent and looked fiercer than
a wolf.</p>

<p>“Who are ye?” he asked. “Is this a time to come
knocking at honest men’s doors?”</p>

<p>“Ay,” I answered, “if there be such excuse as we have,
Master Watson.”</p>

<p>And I stepped back a pace or two so that the moon
shone full upon my face and figure. He started as he
saw me, and I knew that he noted the resemblance to
my father.</p>

<p>“William Dale’s lad!” he said. “William Dale!
What should a Dale want of me?”</p>

<p>“Your son, Master Watson.”</p>

<p>He lifted his hands and shook them in the moonlight,
and his eyes gleamed through his bushy eyebrows.</p>

<p>“My son? I have no son! Son? He that was my
son hath robbed me—me, his father! A thousand
guineas that I had saved and hidden—do you
hear?—he hath taken them all and fled, like a
thief. My son—my only son. Begone, William Dale,
begone. Nay, stand there, stand there, and hear
me curse him!”</p>

<p>We stood silent and horrified, watching the old man
as he shook his trembling hands in the air and cursed
his son in the name of God. The men behind us crept
up and listened and trembled; the old woman, weeping
and sobbing by the house wall, shivered and quaked as
the terrible white-haired figure lifted his arms in the
moonlight and cursed his son with awful words. And
then suddenly the old man paused in the midst of his
denunciation and fell down on the ground as if he were
dead. Truly the wrongs that himself had done were
returning to him in tenfold measure.</p>

<h2>XXXVIII</h2>

<h3>OF THE SURRENDER OF PONTEFRACT CASTLE</h3>

<p>So Dennis Watson had escaped me, and there was
naught for it but to wait with what patience I could for
some future opportunity of settling matters with him.
We left the wretched old man his father to the care of
his own people, and returned to Dale’s Field. Until
that moment our recent adventures had not brought me
any feeling of fatigue, for I had thought of naught but
punishing my enemy, but when we found Dennis flown
beyond our immediate reach, a reaction came over me,
and I was glad to get home and into my bed, where I
slept as soundly as a bear in winter.</p>

<p>It was now the first day of June, and we had been
away from the castle four days. During our absence
no news had come to Dale’s Field of any change in the
position of affairs, only, said Jacob Trusty, who took a
keen interest in the siege, the cannonading had been
much more vigorous than previously. We were not
inclined to remain longer away from the scene of
hostilities than we could help, and we therefore
determined to make an attempt to pass the enemy’s lines
that night. We passed the day at Dale’s Field, resting
after our exertions, and receiving many messages from
my mother and Lucy for Ben Tuckett, who they
imagined must by that time have suffered exceedingly
from his long privation. Also in the afternoon of that
day I went round my farm with Rose, whom until then
I had not seen for a long time, and did not know when
I should see again.</p>

<p>We left Dale’s Field after dark, and pushed on towards
Pontefract, hearing now and then the sound of a solitary
gun fired by besiegers or besieged. It was no easy
matter to pass the enemy’s lines, for they had begun to
keep a very zealous watch; but by the exercise of care
and patience we eluded their vigilance, and were admitted
to the Castle again about an hour before midnight.
Then we learned that the Governor had that day received
letters from Sir Marmaduke Langdale to the effect that
the King’s forces had been successful at Derby, and that
success was everywhere attending the royal arms. This
joyful news had raised the spirits of the garrison to a
high degree, for now there was good hope of his Majesty’s
coming to sweep away the Roundheads and raise the siege.</p>

<p>To no one was this prospect more grateful than to
Ben Tuckett, whom I perceived to have grown at least
two inches less in girth since I had left him,
notwithstanding the fact that there was now plenty of fresh
meat in the Castle. The fact was, poor Ben was beginning
to feel the effect of the confinement, and he was also
pining for a sight of his sweetheart. He was in a very
dolorous mood when we found him, in spite of the good
news from Derby.</p>

<p>“Thou hast been to Dale’s Field, Will?” said he, having
heard all we had to tell him concerning our adventures.</p>

<p>“Indeed we have, Ben. We lay there last night, and
passed the day there into the bargain.”</p>

<p>“Ah!” said he, sighing deeply, it must have been
exceeding pleasant. Did they speak of me at all,
Will?”</p>

<p>“There was a time, Ben, when they spoke of naught
else. I am charged with a thousand messages for thee,
only the mischief is that I have forgotten them. I
remember that Lucy sent thee her dearest love and
duty, and my mother bade me tell thee to mind and not
take a chill after thou hast gotten warm with fighting,
but what else they said I cannot now think of. However,
thou canst imagine it all.”</p>

<p>“ ’Tis very kind of them,” he answered, “very kind
indeed to remember such an unfortunate mortal. Do
not forget to tell them that I always thought of them,
Will.”</p>

<p>“ ’Od’s mercy, Jack!” said I, “what is he talking about?
One might suppose he was going to die before ever he
got out of the Castle.”</p>

<p>“And what have I to live for?” groaned Ben. “I am
a ruined man. Alas! thou knowest not what terrible
things have happened since you and Master Lisle there
rode away.”</p>

<p>“Nay,” said Philip, “we have heard of naught particular.”</p>

<p>“ ’Twas but day before yesterday,” said Ben, “the
Roundheads went up town and occupied my house in
the Market-place. You must know, gentlemen, that I
have always kept an eye on my house, having gone up
to the Round Tower three or four times a day to see if it
still stood. Well, ’twas bad enough for these rogues to
go and occupy my house, for between you and me I had
hidden a pretty stock of goods in it before I fled to the
Castle, hoping they would not be found until the siege
was over, but what was my horror to find that our
gunners were playing the cannon from the Swillington
Tower full upon it! Yea, and continued to do so in
spite of my prayers and admonitions, saying that they
cared not whose house it was as long as they drove the
Roundheads out of it. And now my house is a ruin,
and as for the goods that I had hidden—”</p>

<p>“Never mind, Ben,” said I; “you will find another
house easily enough.”</p>

<p>“And shall I find my stock and my furniture?” he
groaned. “Alas! I am a ruined man. However, they
have not destroyed my money, lads, because Lucy and I
buried what I had under the hearthstone at Dale’s
Field.”</p>

<p>“I thought it would be a wonderful thing if they had
burnt all thy ships, Ben,” said Jack Drumbleforth.
“Why, you old miser, you ought to have given that
money to the King’s cause.”</p>

<p>“Will the King set me up in business again?” asked
Ben. “I trow not, lads. Every man for himself, say I.
If his Majesty would but come and relieve us, I would
not object to parting with some of my store, but he
delays so long that I fear he will never come at all.”</p>

<p>On the 3rd of June, however, there came to us letters
from Newark, conveying intelligence of a great victory
achieved by the King at Leicester. His Majesty had
made a vigorous assault upon that town, and had finally
carried the siege, making the garrison prisoners to the
number of fifteen hundred, and securing an immense
booty, which was instantly divided amongst the Royalist
soldiers. Upon learning this news we were all greatly
pleased, and Ben Tuckett so far plucked up his fallen
spirits as to offer to lead a sally against the Roundheads
in their trenches.</p>

<p>We now lived in daily hopes of seeing the arrival of a
great force charged with the mission of relieving us, but
we heard of nothing until the 6th of June, when a
prisoner taken in the Castle mill informed us that the
King’s troops were coming to our relief, and had already
reached Tuxford. He further said that the Parliamentary
forces were retreating northward before the King, and
would probably assemble in our neighbourhood, where a
great battle was therefore to be expected shortly. This
information we believed to be true, for two days later
there came a great body of Parliamentary horse from
the southward, which had been obliged to quit their
quarters about Doncaster and Tickhill. The next day,
too, we heard heavy firing in the direction of Sheffield,
and from this circumstance augured that our friends were
drawing near. Two days, however, passed away, and no
relief force appeared, so that we knew not what to think.
Nevertheless, we were so far from being cast down by
the delay, that on the 11th we made a great sally from
the Castle in different directions, and prevailed so
mightily against the enemy that we left forty of them
dead upon the field, and brought eleven prisoners into
the Castle, together with a great supply of muskets,
pikes, and ammunition, which we found in their trenches
and outworks. As for our own losses, they were but
very slight, for none of our men were killed, and only
two wounded.</p>

<p>We heard no more news until the 16th of June, when
General Poyntz, commander of the Parliamentary forces
at Pontefract, sent a drum to the Castle with a letter for
Sir William Lowther, in which it was stated that a great
battle had been fought at Naseby two days previously,
whereat the King had been utterly routed, nearly two
thousand Royalists having been left dead on the field
and five thousand taken prisoners, together with all the
King’s artillery and baggage. The letter further
summoned us to surrender at once, saying that it were best
policy to do so while mercy was yet to be hoped for, for
there was now a great Parliamentary force at hand, and
we should shortly be obliged to submit whether we
would or not.</p>

<p>Now, we did not believe this news, because we had
but a little time previously received letters from Newark,
dated June 14th, in which Colonel Washington informed
us that his Majesty was at that time at Melton Mowbray,
and was preparing to march forward to our assistance.
We therefore regarded General Poyntz’s letter as a trick
of the enemy, and Sir William Lowther immediately
informed the officer who had brought it that he neither
feared the forces that might come against us, nor valued
the mercy which was offered, and bade him begone with
that answer to his commander. We were subsequently
strengthened in our belief that General Poyntz’s news
was false by the reception of more letters from Newark,
in which the King was still spoken of as advancing to
succour us. But as the days passed on no help came,
and we presently began to wonder whether our
information was correct or not. Shortly, however, we
received news from our own friends of the battle of Naseby,
but their account differed vastly from that given us by
General Poyntz; for whereas he had represented the
affair as a Roundhead victory, our informants told us
that the fight had been resumed after the defeat of the
King, and that our forces rallying had put the
Parliamentary troops to flight, routing them utterly and
slaying thousands of them, including General Cromwell.</p>

<p>We continued in this fashion for many days after
that, now hearing one thing and now another, and
hardly knowing which rumour to believe. Meanwhile,
our enemy often received reinforcements which came
marching from north or south as the case might be, and
formed fresh obstacles to our success. The siege went
on in the same fashion, each side doing its best to cripple
the other. But while we were able to slay many of the
Roundheads, they did us little damage owing to our
secure position. Nevertheless, we had an enemy inside
the Castle whose power we feared far more than even
the terrible Cromwell himself. This was starvation,
which now began to creep upon us slowly but very
surely. By the 27th of June, we had no fresh
provisions whatever, and there was no prospect of relief
coming to us from any quarter. This scarcity of food
bred discouragement and discontent amongst our men,
several of whom deserted at this time.</p>

<p>We were now indeed in a sad plight. The help which
had been so constantly promised to us, and the thought
of which had lifted up our hearts in the struggle, came
not, and we were therefore not only hungry but heartsick.
Nevertheless we were resolved, or at any rate the
majority of us were, to hold the Castle in the King’s
name until the last moment. About the beginning of
the second week in July we had more letters from
Newark, one of which named the day and hour when
Sir Marmaduke Langdale would come to our aid, and
this good news was presently confirmed by another
letter from Sandal Castle, wherein we were told that the
relieving force was at hand. But we had barely read
these letters when definite tidings reached us of the
complete defeat of the Royalist forces under Goring and
Langdale, and of the approach of further reinforcements
to the Parliamentary army already surrounding us.</p>

<p>So now our last hopes were fled, and there was naught
for it but to make an honourable surrender. We had
defended the Castle for a space of five months, and
during that time we had slain over a thousand of our
enemies with very little loss to ourselves. If we had
been able to secure provisions we could have held out
for the King for ever, for the place was so strong as to
be wellnigh impregnable. Food, however, we could not
get, and we could do the King no good by starving to
death. At this point the besiegers made us honourable
offers as to our surrender, which we presently accepted,
marching away from the Castle at eight o’clock on the
morning of July 21, 1645. The major portion of the
garrison went forward to Newark, but I and my
companions stayed at Dale’s Field, and were not sorry to
see somewhat in the way of home comforts after our
long and serious privations.</p>

<h2>XXXIX</h2>

<h3>OF THE DEATH OF PHILIP LISLE</h3>

<p>It was now drawing near harvest time, and I determined
to see my crops gathered and garnered before I did
aught else. To tell truth, I had lost a good deal during
the recent hostilities, for the Roundheads had levied
contributions on my cattle many a time while the siege
was in progress, so that when I came back to Dale’s
Field I found myself poorer by some fourteen or fifteen
head of cattle, to say naught of a score or so of sheep.
However, I was thankful to find that they had not burnt
my house or my buildings, which was what I had feared
more than once.</p>

<p>I took Philip and Ben home with me to Dale’s Field
when we left the Castle, while Jack Drumbleforth went
to his father’s house, where the Vicar was much delighted
with the sight of his son. Now that we were all at home
again the women made much of us, for they were all
agreed that we looked like half-starved rats. Naught
would suffice them upon the day of our coming home
but that we must have a feast, and to this joyful event a
messenger was despatched to bring Parson Drumbleforth
and Jack. We were very merry that night, and Ben
Tuckett, having found his spirits again, amused us with
stories of his own prowess during the siege, which, to
hear him talk, was exceeding great and wonderful.
Cause for rejoicing, however, we had little beyond the
fact that we were all safe and sound. Our party was
defeated on all sides, and we knew not what would
happen next.</p>

<p>“I shall to the wars again,” said Jack, when we began
to discuss the future. “Beaten we are, no doubt; but I
will go fight for the King until the last blow has been
struck.”</p>

<p>“Well said, Jack,” said Philip Lisle; “I will go with
you. We seem to be vanquished at this present time,
but all is not lost yet.”</p>

<p>“Gentlemen,” said Ben Tuckett, who sat in the
chimney-corner near Lucy, “if you only knew how
warmly I approve your sentiments you would be
delighted. I love to see brave men. However, my duty
forbids me to further engage in warfare. I have looked
after the King’s business so long that my own hath
suffered. As for my house, it is in ruins—and ’twas a
Royalist cannon did it, too—and I suppose my stock
which lay hidden there is lost.”</p>

<p>“Thou art not the only man that has lost something,”
said Jack. “It will be worse for many than for thee,
Ben. God send they do not fine all of us that have
taken part with the King.”</p>

<p>“That is what I expect them to do,” said Philip Lisle.</p>

<p>“What!” cried Ben. “And will they fine me, too,
after all I have lost? Then I had best do naught in the
way of reopening my shop. They cannot fine me if I
have naught, can they?”</p>

<p>“They can clap thee into gaol, lad,” said Jack. “Yea,
and hold thee there until thou hast paid the piper.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” cried poor Ben, “was ever man so unfortunate!
However, if only it be a small fine—”</p>

<p>And with that he began to look hard at the hearthstone
under which he and Lucy had buried his money,
and after that he said no more, but seemed to think
deeply. But when my mother and the girls had gone
to bed and Jack and Philip were talking their plans
over, he drew me into a corner and began to talk
confidentially.</p>

<p>“Will,” said he, “I have been thinking to-night that it
is high time you and I were settled. We are neither of
us as young as we were.”</p>

<p>“Speak for thyself, Ben. As for me, I am four-and-twenty.”</p>

<p>“Is it so little? Well, to be sure I am thy junior.
Somehow I had thought myself twoscore at least. It is,
I suppose, because I have passed through so much
tribulation. However, to the point. It is, I say, time
we were settled.”</p>

<p>“Are we not settled already?”</p>

<p>“A man never is settled,” said Ben wisely, “until he be
married.”</p>

<p>“Oh! now I see what thou art driving at, Master
Benjamin. I suppose you and Mistress Lucy are so
smitten with each other’s good looks that you wish to
hasten the wedding?”</p>

<p>“Put it as you please,” said he. “For my part, I do
not see why Parson Drumbleforth should not marry us
as soon as harvest is over. I tell thee what I think,
Will. Lucy and I have gotten two hundred guineas in
gold hidden under yonder hearthstone, which is a sum
that no man may despise. I want not to lose it in fines
and penalties. Now, if I open my shop again, these
Roundhead rogues, seeing me a man of substance, will
levy a heavy fine upon me, and I shall lose all. So let
me lie quietly here, working in thy harvest-field until
matters have blown over somewhat. Then we will all
be married and my money will be safe. What do you
think?”</p>

<p>“I think, Ben, that thou art a second Solomon.
However, these are not over-pleasant times for marrying.
You would not like Lucy to be a widow within a month
of her wedding.”</p>

<p>“Heaven forbid!” said he, turning pale at the thought.
“Why should she?”</p>

<p>“Because thou hast been such a bold assailer of the
Roundheads that they may desire to cut off thy head.
Wait a while, Ben, till the country be settled.”</p>

<p>But when I came to consider what Ben had said, I
began to think there might be some reason in his notions.
Come what might, it was my intention to go no more to
the wars: let the King and the Commons do what they
would, I meant to stay at home and mind my own
business. And since I had made up my mind to that,
why should I not hasten my wedding, and so have a
better right than ever to protect my dear love? The
more I thought of the matter, the more I liked the idea,
so that before I slept that night I resolved to see what
Rose thought of it. The next morning I rose early and
went out to look round my farm, and, finding Rose
already risen, I asked her to go with me, as had been
her custom in the days before I went a-fighting. So we
went hand in hand through the fields, which were already
ripening unto harvest.</p>

<p>“How strange it seems,” said Rose, as we walked
slowly along, “not to hear the sound of the cannon!
All day we used to listen to it, and at every shot we
prayed God that none of ours should suffer. Not a day
passed that we did not think of you, and wonder what
you were doing, and whether you were ill or well; and
many a time did old Jacob take his staff and walk across
the fields to the hill-top, so that he might come back and
tell us that the King’s standard still floated over the
Castle. And now here you are safe and sound once
more.”</p>

<p>“Yes, “I answered; “and I shall never go away again,
Rose, of my own free will. Let those fight that will: if
I had stayed at home and minded my own business, that
villain had not vexed you.”</p>

<p>“Hush, hush!” she said. “Let that be; I am none
the worse for such vexation as that.”</p>

<p>“Nevertheless,” I said, “here I am and here I stay.
These times of trouble are not over yet, and I shall do
better to protect my own than to go a-fighting for the
King. You had rather I stayed at home than that I
went to the wars, Rose?”</p>

<p>“Why,” said she, laughing, “is not that a strange
question to ask of me, considering that I do not care to
trust you out of my sight, Master Will?”</p>

<p>And she smiled so archly in my face and looked at me
with such eyes of love that I took her into my arms and
told her of all that was in my mind, namely, that I
wanted her to marry me as soon as harvest was in, so
that in future I could watch over her even more closely
than before. To which she answered honestly and
fondly that she was mine and mine only, and would do
whatever I pleased. So that matter was settled, and we
went homewards across the fields to acquaint Philip
Lisle of our desires; and if there were any people in all
God’s world who were happier than we were at that
moment it is a marvel to me, for our happiness was
much too great for words.</p>

<p>We found Philip and Jack busied in cleaning their
harness, while Ben sat by and lectured them on the
folly of war in general and of this war in particular.
Whether they attended to his remarks I know not, but
at the moment of our arrival they were conversing
together in undertones, so that I think Master Ben’s
discourse flew above their heads.</p>

<p>“War,” quoth Ben, as we came up, “was first of all
invented by the evil one, and therefore no wise man
ought to engage in it. As for me, I only went into the
Castle to defend myself, because, gentlemen, every
honest citizen hath a right to take up arms when his
own good estate is threatened. But as to fighting
for a—”</p>

<p>“Good Ben,” said I, “you ought to have been a parson,
for your tongue is ever ready;” and I came close to him
and asked him if he had sounded Lucy as to his plans of
the previous night. To which he answered that he had
not, but he knew Lucy’s mind on that matter as well as
he knew his own. So with that I bade him find Lucy
and take her to my mother, and to them I brought
Philip and Rose, and we there and then arranged
matters for a double wedding, which was to take place
as soon as we had got harvest over, if nothing contrary
happened in the meantime.</p>

<p>“Only, my children,” said Philip, “do not wait for my
coming, for if I am not here at the appointed day it will
be because urgent business keepeth Jack and me elsewhere.
I shall be with you in spirit if not in the flesh.
For you know, Will, that his Majesty hath been very
generous to me in the past, and I will not desert him
now that he hath fallen low.”</p>

<p>And with that he gave us his blessing and kissed
Rose many times and shook my hand, and later in the
afternoon he and Jack rode away, promising to return
in six weeks’ time so that they might see us married.</p>

<p>“We are for Newark first,” said Jack, “but after that
God knows where we shall go. However, lads, it shall
go hard with us but we strive to ride northward when
you are made Benedicts.”</p>

<p>And so they rode away and we settled down to our
quiet farm life. With the fall of the Castle, military
operations in our parts were almost over, and people
were permitted to attend to their own matters in peace.
Sir Thomas Fairfax had been appointed Governor of the
Castle by the House of Commons, and for a while he
busied himself in making strict inquiry as to those of
our neighbourhood who had resisted the Parliament,
and in dispersing such Royalists as gathered together in
any numbers. Us, however, he was pleased to let alone,
probably because he found that we were engaged in our
own pursuits and had no mind for further fighting.
This suited Ben and myself, for with August the harvest
began and we were at work early and late. Nevertheless,
we were watched pretty closely by the Parliamentary
authorities, as were all men who had retired to their
own homes after leaving the Royalist army.</p>

<p>As the harvest drew to an end the two girls were
busily occupied in preparing much finery for the
wedding. My mother, who had many old-fashioned
ideas on this subject, had set apart a chamber for
them, wherein they shaped and sewed and had the
help of a woman who was skilled in fine sewing. Into
this chamber Ben and I did often try to peep, but were
jealously excluded, all the comfort we got being an
assurance that we should see our brides very fine
on the wedding-day. Presently it became time for
us to put the banns up at church, and Ben was
mightily tickled at hearing his own name read out in
conjunction with Lucy’s. Indeed, as the time drew
near there was no prouder man than Ben Tuckett in
all the country.</p>

<p>Upon the third day before the wedding, Ben and I
were coming from Wentbridge, when we heard a horse
climbing the hill behind us. It was drawing towards
night, and there was a thick mist in the valley, so that
we could not make out the face or figure of the horseman
until he was close upon us. But when the horse and its
rider came out of the mist a great sinking of heart stole
over me, for I saw that it was Jack Drumbleforth, and
he was alone. He recognised us at the same moment,
and spurred his tired horse forward. Then we saw that
he himself was careworn and in evil plight, for one arm
hung loosely at his side, and there was a wound across
his cheek that had lately bled.</p>

<p>“Jack!” I cried, as we ran up to him. “Jack, you have
evil news?”</p>

<p>“The worst, Will,” he answered, speaking with
difficulty. “The worst. Philip Lisle is dead. He was
killed last night near Newark, and so was Captain
Trevor and many another.”</p>

<p>And with that a great darkness seemed to fall across
us, and I could only think of what my dear Rose must
suffer when she heard the sad news.</p>

<p>“I am hurt,” said Jack. “My arm is broke, I think.
Let us go on, Will, for I am like to fall off my horse.”</p>

<p>We went homeward sadly enough, Ben leading Jack’s
horse, while I walked at the side and let Jack lean on
my shoulder. We were debating how we should break
the news to Rose, when she and Lucy suddenly came
out of one of the fields by the roadside and ran to meet
us. Suddenly Rose caught sight of Jack’s face, and all
the colour went out of her own. But she came forward
and laid her hand on his, and looked at him with such
pleading eyes that I saw the tears start into his own as
he looked down at her.</p>

<p>“My father?” she said. “My father?”</p>

<p>“Dear Mistress Rose,” he answered, “I would rather
have died myself than have brought you sad news.
Your dear father was a brave man, and he died a brave
man’s death.”</p>

<h2>XL</h2>

<h3>OF OUR IMPRISONMENT IN PONTEFRACT CASTLE</h3>

<p>So there was no more talk of our marriage at that time,
and I went sadly enough to tell Parson Drumbleforth
that it would not take place, and that his son Jack had
got a grievous hurt. And thereupon arose a stout
controversy between the Vicar’s housekeeper and myself, for
Mistress Deborah was for having Jack brought home at
once, so that she could nurse him, while I was all for
keeping him at Dale’s Field, where I knew he would
have better care taken of him than in the Vicarage. In
this matter I carried the day, for the Vicar agreed with
me, albeit he had hard work to convince his 
housekeeper, of whom he stood in no little fear. So at
Dale’s Field Jack remained, and Parson Drumbleforth used to
walk out there to see him every day.</p>

<p>Now, at first my dear Rose would not trouble Jack to
tell her the manner of her father’s death, because she
knew that he himself was badly hurt, and she feared to
do aught to increase the fever into which he had fallen.
But when they had nursed him into something like his
old self she took me by the hand one afternoon and led
me into Jack’s chamber, where the Vicar was sitting
with his son, and there she asked him to tell us all that
had happened.</p>

<p>“And do not fear, Master John,” said she, “to tell me
everything, for you can say nothing that will hurt me
more than what I already know. Only I shall be better
and happier to know how my dear father died.”</p>

<p>So she sat and listened to what Jack had to tell us of
this sad matter, and she held my hand in her own all
the while as if she got some comfort from knowing that
I was near her.</p>

<p>It was not a long story that Jack had to tell. They
had followed the garrison to Newark, and had there
found many Royalists who had fled from the
Parliamentarians after the fight at Naseby, and in this
company they had remained some time, scarcely knowing
what to do next. For some talked of one thing and
some of another, but nobody seemed to know whether
the King would again rally his forces or not. Here and
there in the Midlands were houses still fortified against
the Parliamentarians, and at various places were
gatherings of Royalist troops, but there was no one to direct
them, for the King’s army had been entirely disorganized
at the battle of Naseby. The Parliamentarians were
meanwhile continually engaged in surrounding and
disarming the scattered Royalists, and in reducing to
subjection such fortresses as the country gentlemen had
retreated to, and it was in riding forth to relieve one of
these houses that Philip Lisle and Captain Trevor had
met their death. For the place was one that was well
protected, being naturally strong and surrounded by a
deep moat, but the Roundheads had wellnigh starved,
the garrison into subjection, when Captain Trevor
organized a relieving party and set out to give help to
his comrades. Between this expedition and the
Parliamentarians a stout fight had resulted, but the enemy
vastly outnumbering them, his own party, said Jack,
had been beaten, and the garrison subsequently obliged
to surrender.</p>

<p>“There were very few of us left to fight in the end,”
said Jack, “and Master Lisle and Captain Trevor and
myself were cut off from the rest, so that the enemy
bade us surrender while there was hope of mercy. But
we would have naught of that, and continued to engage
them as best we could. And then Master Lisle’s horse
was killed under him, so that he was brought to his feet,
and Captain Trevor was shot through the heart immediately
afterwards, leaving me and Master Lisle fighting
back to back. Then I heard him shout behind me,
‘For God and the King!’ in a hearty voice, but
presently I felt him reel against me and fall across
his horse, and at the same moment my arm was
shattered and the pain was so fearful that I fainted
and knew no more. But when I came to myself after
some time, the fight was over, and Captain Trevor and
Master Lisle lay near me, both dead, and with such a
peaceful look on their faces that I knew they had felt
no pain in their death. By that time the Roundheads
had passed away to another part of the field, so I
watched my opportunity and captured a horse that was
grazing near, and because the enemy was thick between
me and Newark I came north, knowing that I could do
no more in those parts.”</p>

<p>So that was all that he had to tell us, and my dear
love, though she shed many tears while he spoke, was
comforted somewhat because she now knew all. However,
she often sat near Jack after that, and would ask
him to tell her of all that had befallen her father since
she had last seen him; whereupon Jack would strive to
remember all that Philip had said and done, recalling
many incidents that he thought would be pleasing to
her.</p>

<p>Now, although it was out of the question for us to be
married at that time, both Rose and I felt that our
sorrow ought not to stand in the way of Ben’s and
Lucy’s happiness, and after a time we begged them to
arrange with Parson Drumbleforth for their wedding.
But while honest Ben was greatly pleased with us for
thinking of him, he would not listen to our proposal.</p>

<p>“Nay, Will,” quoth he, when I told him what we
wished, “indeed, neither Lucy nor myself would
consent to joys which you and Rose cannot share. Do we
not feel for poor Rose as keenly as if it were our own
trouble? Marry, and so we ought, for are we not all as
one family? So let us wait until spring, when Rose’s
first grief will have gained some comfort, and then we
will all be married together.”</p>

<p>And with that he wrung my hand and hastened away
to his work; for he had become an ardent farmer, and
was for ever busying himself amongst the sheep or the
cattle.</p>

<p>So the time passed on until the spring of 1646, and
until then we were allowed to live peaceably upon our
land, minding our own business as we did before the
war began. There was no fighting, or next to none, that
winter, and we were in hopes that the King and the
Commons might adjust their differences, and rid the
land of that hateful war. We heard little at that time
of what was going on. Some said that the Scotch were
coming to rescue the King; others, that the
Presbyterians and the Independents were about to fight
between themselves for supremacy. In the first week of May,
1646, we heard that his Majesty had entered the
Scottish camp at Newark, and soon afterwards we
learned that the Scotch army, carrying the King with
them, had retreated to Newcastle. But we had little
time to think of these matters, for there were fresh
troubles gathering round ourselves.</p>

<p>When the second siege of Pontefract Castle was over,
the Governor, Sir Thomas Fairfax, in pursuance of
orders from the Commons, occupied himself in pursuing
such of the Royalist forces as were still banded together,
and in reducing the various manor-houses in that
neighbourhood which were still fortified, and that he might
not be hindered in this work he appointed one Colonel
Cotterel to be his Vice-Governor, and gave him a force
of a hundred men wherewith to occupy the Castle. For
a while Colonel Cotterel left the Royalists of his
neighbourhood pretty much to their own devices, doing no
more than keeping his eye upon them so that they
might not band themselves together again. But when
the military power began to make itself felt—for at that
time Cromwell and his army were the real rulers of
England—he, taking his orders no doubt from his
superiors, began to harass the Royalist gentlemen of his
neighbourhood with exceeding severity. It was known
which of us had helped to hold the Castle against the
Parliament, and we presently found ourselves narrowly
watched, and treated in such a fashion as was hard for
flesh and blood to bear. But ere long even sterner
measures were employed against us.</p>

<p>It was, I think, one evening about the middle of May,
1646, that a party of troopers, headed by an officer, rode
into our yard at Dale’s Field and called for me. I went
out to speak to them, and found the officer to be one
John Campion, a man that I had known many years for
a stout Roundhead.</p>

<p>“Well, Master Dale,” said he, “we have come to
request you to take a little ride with us this evening.
Colonel Cotterel desires your presence at the Castle.”</p>

<p>Now, I could not at first understand why Colonel
Cotterel should send for me, who wished not to have
aught to do with him or his; but I reflected that I could
not help obeying his summons, seeing that he had sent
twenty armed men to fetch me, and I therefore saddled
my horse and bade my friends farewell, telling them
not to fear if I did not return that night. So we rode
away, but came to a halt at Darrington, where Campion
delivered a similar message to Jack Drumbleforth, who
was then living with his father. What they wanted
with us at the Castle neither Jack nor I could make out,
but we agreed that we were being fetched thither for no
good. And this turned out to be the case, for we were
no sooner inside the Barbican than our horses were
taken from us and we were shown into the Governor’s
presence, who informed us that because of our resistance
to the Parliament we were condemned to pay a fine,
which in my case amounted to two hundred pounds,
and Jack’s to half that sum. Moreover, continued
Cotterel, he had received proof that we and others of
our way of thinking were meditating a fresh rising in
these parts, and we must therefore consider ourselves
prisoners until such time as he saw fit to release us.</p>

<p>Now, we felt this to be very harsh and overbearing
conduct, for it proved that the Roundheads were not
willing to let us be at peace when we had no intention
of being at aught else; and as for the fines, we felt it
unjust to thus punish us for having done what we
believed to be our duty. However, we were in their
power, and could not help ourselves, and we therefore
took up our quarters in the Castle with what patience
we could, only begging them to inform our friends of
what had happened to us. This they speedily did, for
they shortly sent to Dale’s Field, and seized upon my
cattle and sheep in satisfaction of the fine they had
imposed upon me, so that I had neither horse, ox, nor
sheep left, and poor Jacob Trusty was well-nigh beside
himself with grief and anger.</p>

<p>We soon found that we were not the only prisoners
in the Castle, for Colonel Cotterel had sent out and
apprehended many Royalists of these parts whom he
supposed to be inventing plans for another rising on
behalf of the King. As for fines, he now busily
employed himself in levying them upon all who had
formerly defended the Castle. Some he obliged to
compound for their estates, others he sentenced to the
payment of fines such as he had imposed upon me, so
that there was not a Royalist gentleman or yeoman in
all Osgoldcross that was not cruelly made to pay for his
loyalty. Some, indeed, paid great amounts. Sir George
Wentworth was fined three thousand pounds; Sir
Nicholas Yarborough paid six hundred pounds; Francis
Neville paid a thousand pounds; Sir George Dalston
paid seven hundred pounds; Sir William Lowther, the
late Governor, paid two hundred; while Sir John
Woolstoneholme of Nostel, who had given his plate to the
King, was fined the value thereof, namely, ten
thousand pounds.</p>

<p>We remained prisoners in Pontefract Castle for more
than two years, during which time we saw naught of our
friends, and knew little as to their welfare. But during
that time a movement began amongst the Royalists of
our parts, which ended in the Castle being surprised and
wrested from the possession of our enemies. There was
in the Castle at the time of our imprisonment a gentleman
named Morrice, who had lived a somewhat adventurous life,
and had fought on both sides during the war
between King and Commons. In his youth he had been
page to Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, and had
subsequently entered the King’s service and fought as an
officer. For some reason, which no one clearly knew,
he quitted the Royalist forces and transferred his services
to the Roundheads. In their cause he speedily
distinguished himself, and was advanced to the rank of
colonel. His private character, however, was not
pleasing to Cromwell, who would have none but sober
and godly men in his army, so that, when the New
Model was formed in 1646, he was left unemployed, in
consequence of which neglect he retired to his estate
in Yorkshire, and began to form plans for revenging
himself upon the Parliamentary leaders by surprising
Pontefract Castle. This he was all the more easily able
to do because he was a very intimate friend of Cotterel,
who was always inviting him to his table, and made
much of his society. Morrice took advantage of this
confidence to further his own designs. He contrived to
entice certain of Cotterel’s men into his own service,
and he made such arrangements for surprising the
Castle as seemed most suitable.</p>

<p>The Royalists at that time were accustomed to meet
at the house of Mr. Beaumont, the Vicar of South
Kirkby, some four miles from the Castle, and to them
Morrice communicated his designs as occasion arose.
While he worked towards the end in view inside the
Castle, they secretly made arrangements for bringing
their men together at a convenient time. During these
operations Cotterel had no notion that Morrice was
actively working to betray him, and he continued to
hold out to him many professions of friendship, to
which Morrice suitably responded. Finally, after an
abortive attempt, a successful recapture of the Castle
was effected on the 6th of June, 1648, and Colonel Cotterel,
and such of his men as were not killed or wounded, were
strictly confined to the quarters where they had lately
detained their Royalist prisoners.</p>

<p>The Castle was now once more in the hands of the
King’s friends, and those of us who had been
imprisoned therein were free, and had the choice of
remaining to garrison it against the Parliamentarians.
Several of my companions elected to follow this course,
and went actively to work to provision the Castle, where
there was now gathered a force of about six hundred
men, who, on Morrice’s recommendation, chose Sir
John Digby to be their Governor. But for my part, I
was filled with anxiety about my friends, of whom I had
heard but little for over two years, and I accordingly
left the Castle and betook myself straightway to Dale’s
Field.</p>

<h2>XLI</h2>

<h3>OF MY JOURNEY TO LONDON</h3>

<p>I drew near to my house with many anxious feelings,
not knowing what news might be in store for me. We
had been so jealously watched during our confinement
in the Castle that it had been almost an impossibility to
gain any knowledge of what was going on in the outside
world. Once during the first few months after my
arrest I had received tidings from Dale’s Field to the
effect that all was well there, and that Ben was seeing to
my affairs. But after that I had no more news, for
Colonel Cotterel imposed many strict rules upon his
captives, and would permit no letters to pass either in
or out, fearing lest somewhat of a treasonable and
dangerous nature should be communicated. Whether
they were all well and alive at Dale’s Field, or some
ailing and, perchance, dead, I did not know, which
uncertainty often caused me many sad and weary
thoughts.</p>

<p>It was towards the close of a summer evening when I
drew near my house. Nothing seemed changed, so far
as I could see from a hurried glance round the familiar
objects. I thought as I stood at the orchard gate that I
had never seen aught so beautiful as this homestead of
mine, which my eyes then beheld for the first time for
two long years. For the soft light of evening fell upon
the house and the red-roofed buildings beyond, and the
apple-trees in the orchard were in full bloom, and the
great bushy lilacs were loaded with delicate clusters of
blossom, and the honeysuckle that grew over the porch
was covered with yellow flower. Everything was very
still about the house, and I passed through the orchard
unobserved, and speedily gained the window of my
mother’s parlour. There I stole cautiously across the
flower-beds and peeped into the room, hoping to see
some face that would light up with welcome at the sight
of me. But the room was empty, and I stood at the
window examining it, and marvelling to find that it had
changed in nothing since I had last seen it. For there
was my mother’s chair and table by the broad
window-seat, and upon the table lay one of her religious
books, and by its side some knitting work that she had
evidently laid down on being called away to some household
matter. Everything in that room, indeed, was just as it
always had been, and it only needed her presence to
make the picture spring into real life.</p>

<p>I left the window and went round the corner of the
house, intending to enter by the kitchen door. But I
had no sooner got round the great bushes of holly, with
which our walls are surrounded on that side, than I saw
a little group immediately before me, at sight of whom
I stood still. There were Ben and Lucy and Rose, and
they were listening to Jacob Trusty, who was leaning
over the low wall of the fold and talking to them very
earnestly. My footsteps had made no sound on the soft
grass path, and they were unconscious of my presence.
I stood for a moment watching them. Jacob was the
only one whose face was towards me, and I noticed that
he looked old, and aged, and careworn. Suddenly he
lifted his head and saw me. The girls turned and gave
a little cry of wonder and surprise, looking at first as if
they did not know me—which would have been no
wonder, for I had grown a great beard during my captivity.
But Rose suddenly sprang forward with a great cry of
“ ’Tis Will!” and in another moment they were all round
me, laughing and crying over me, and shaking my hand
and clapping my back all at once.</p>

<p>“Dear heart!” said Jacob, “I thought I saw a ghost
when I lifted up my head and caught sight of thee
standing there. No finer sight have I seen this many a
day.”</p>

<p>“Alas!” said Rose. “You have changed, dear Will,
since we last saw you, for you look pale and worn, and
oh, so much older!”</p>

<p>“Why,” said I, “that is just what I was thinking about
all of you, for you all have a sad look that I like not.
Yea, even thou, old Ben, lookest more sad than merry.
But come, let us inside to my mother, and we will forget
all our sadness for a time at least.”</p>

<p>And I made a move towards the house, leading Rose
with me. But Rose laid her hand on my arm as if to
stay me, and the others hung back, while Jacob Trusty
shook his head.</p>

<p>“Rose,” I cried, “what is it? What ails you all? Ben,
speak. My mother?”</p>

<p>“Oh!” groaned Ben, “tell him, Rose.”</p>

<p>But I knew it already. Something had told me there
was sadness and sorrow for me at Dale’s Field as I came
along the highway in the summer twilight. Something
in the sight of the empty parlour went to my heart and
confirmed my sense of coming trouble. And now, when
Ben spoke, a great wave of grief rose up in my heart and
shut out past and future, so that I only knew that I was
suffering as I had suffered that night, many years before,
when my father was shot down before my very eyes.</p>

<p>I sat down on the low wall and covered my face with
my hands and said naught. Only I heard the others go
away, and felt Rose sit by me and place her arm within
mine as if she would comfort me, for which comfort I
was exceeding grateful, my heart being like to burst with
trouble. And after that she told me very gently that
my dear mother had died a month before, after a short
illness that occasioned her very little pain, and was now
buried by my father’s side in Darrington churchyard.
So then I knew the worst, and rose up to face my great
sorrow manfully, but the heart within me was cold and
heavy, and would have been empty of aught but grief if
it had not been for my dear love, who did all to comfort
me that a woman can do.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a sad home-coming for you, my poor Will,” said
Rose, as she stood by me, “and I am afraid that Ben and
Jacob have more sad news in store for you.”</p>

<p>“They can tell me naught like what I have heard
already,” I said. “But let us go in, Rose, so that I may
hear it and have it over. My heart is full of sorrow
tonight, and I should be in a poor way if it were not for
you, sweetheart.”</p>

<p>But with that she put her hands in mine and lifted up
her face to kiss me, so that the love in her eyes gave me
some new life, and I went inside with her to hear what
bad news Ben had in store for me.</p>

<p>“We have had sore times, Will,” said Ben, when the
girls had found me something to eat and drink, and I
was back in my old place at the head of the long table.
“You need not marvel that we all look careworn and
troubled.”</p>

<p>“No, marry,” said Jacob, who was seated inside the
kitchen, comforting himself with a mug of ale. “No, for
’tis indeed a troublous time for honest folk. Such times,
such times!”</p>

<p>“What hath happened?” I asked, somehow caring little
how great or terrible the news was. It could not be worse
than the blow that had already fallen upon me.</p>

<p>“Shall I tell him what hath happened since he was
taken away from us, Jacob, or will you?” said Ben.</p>

<p>“Nay,” answered Jacob, shaking his white head.
“Nay, ’tis too much for me. Say on, Master Benjamin,
say on.”</p>

<p>So Ben proceeded to tell me of all that had occurred
at Dale’s Field since the evening, two years before, when
the body of troopers fetched me away to the Castle.
“Soon after that event,” said Ben, “more troopers
appeared at Dale’s Field and carried away all the live
stock and what grain and wool there was stored about the
place, saying that they were levying distress upon thy
goods in satisfaction of the fine imposed upon thee. So
thoroughly did they carry out their business that they
left naught but three of the horses and certain of the
milch cows, all else in the shape of oxen and sheep being
driven away before them, leaving fold and fields as bare
as if the land had been tenantless.”</p>

<p>“Well,” said I, “I cannot help it. We are in strange
times and must wait till better come.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said Ben, “but that is not all, Will.”</p>

<p>“No,” said Jacob, “not by a long chalk.”</p>

<p>“We might have brought matters round,” continued
Ben, “if they had left us in peace after that, but the
mischief was that they put in another appearance soon
after harvest, and forced us to thresh the corn, the grain
of which they immediately carted away, saying that thy
fine was not yet satisfied. Presently they came again
and took away many loads of straw, and this they
repeated so often that we never knew when to expect
them. As to resisting their demands, we could not, for
they were always a strong force and made much show of
arms.”</p>

<p>“Nevertheless,” said Jacob, “they heard my mind upon
the matter more than once.”</p>

<p>“Well, “continued Ben, “they kept up this continual
raid upon thy goods, Will, until very recently, so that
they have made the place as barren as a clay-field. We
could not get a little live stock together but that they
came and seized it, nor have we had a harvest the fruits
of which they have not claimed. Horses, cattle, sheep,
all these have they got; nay, indeed, they have had all
thy substance since the time they took thee to the Castle.
Nevertheless, we did what we could, for whenever Jacob
and I got the chance, we sold what stock and produce we
conveniently could, and hid the money in safety for
thee. But it has been a hard time, and we are wellnigh
worn out with anxiety and sorrow.”</p>

<p>And that I believed, for poor Ben’s face was pinched
and pale, and the merry look that was always in his eyes
even when he was in his doleful moods was now gone, so
that I saw the honest fellow had suffered more for me
that I was aware of.</p>

<p>“Have patience, Ben,” I said, trying to cheer them all;
“they will rob me no more, for the Castle is once more
in the hands of the King’s friends, and these Roundhead
knaves will not come cattle-lifting hereabouts yet awhile.
Levying distress in satisfaction of my fine, did they say?
Marry, the fine was but two hundred pounds, and they
must have taken the value of that a dozen times over.
However, we will see if there be not some justice left in
England yet, for I will have redress, if I have to fight
for it.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said Jacob approvingly, “justice is a good word;
but I fear me there is little of that same justice abroad
at present, for ’tis these soldiers that administer
everything nowadays. However, we will fight a whole body
of Roundhead troopers an they come here again reaving
and racking. Oh, an thou couldst have seen the young
bullocks I had fed for market last winter twelvemonth!
A plague on fines and levies, say I!”</p>

<p>But what was done was done, and we had to content
ourselves for that time, being powerless to do anything.
Yet it made my heart sad to go round my granaries, and
barns, and stables, in which I had always taken such
pride, and to find them empty and lifeless. Still, it was
no use to sit down and lament, and we accordingly set to
work to restock the farm and get things into order again.
Only I was a much poorer man when all was done than
I had ever looked to be.</p>

<p>So now matters were very different from what they
had been, and there was such gloom and sadness in our
house as I had never known before. For wherever I
went and whatever I did I missed my dear mother’s
presence, and often started to think I heard her voice
calling me as in the old days. Nay, indeed, I could not
at first believe that I should never see her again nor
hear her speak, and only realized my great loss when I
went in at nights from the fields and saw her chair
empty. As for her parlour, we left it just as it had been
when she was last in it, her book lying on the table, with
a sprig of faded lilac marking the place where she had
last read in it, and by its side the knitting which she
had put down never to take up again. And into that
room none of us went save when we wished to be alone
with our own memories of her. Sometimes Parson
Drumbleforth would come along the highway and go
into the little room and sit there by himself, thinking,
as he told us, of the days when he had sat there with
my father and mother, and he would afterwards come
out with a great look of calm and peace upon his face
and bless us solemnly, and go his way homewards. And
sometimes Jacob Trusty would go to the little window
and peer over his horn spectacles at the book and the
knitting still lying on the little table, and then go back
to his work as if he had seen some holy sight. And,
indeed, I believe he saw more than we did, for he once
told me that it seemed to him that when he thus visited
the little parlour he could see his old mistress still
sitting in her elbow chair reading her book, while the
bright needles clicked against each other as they went
in and out through the wool.</p>

<p>“Yes,” he would often say to Rose and Lucy, “ye see,
lasses, what a holy and a blessed thing it is to have
been a good woman. As for us men, we are rude, and
fierce, and stern, and need a good woman to set us an
example. Yea, and see what store is set by her, so that
her good deeds work after her death.”</p>

<p>Now, I was very busily engaged during the rest of
that summer of 1648 in repairing so far as I could the
damage done by the depredations of the Roundheads,
who had so basely robbed me. Then came the corn
harvest, and we made haste to gather and garner our
crops, being firmly resolved that when they were once
housed nothing but force should despoil us of them.
All this time the last siege of Pontefract Castle had been
in progress, for the Royalists under Colonel Morrice,
having seized the Castle and released us who were
confined there, were holding out against the
Parliamentarian troops once more. This third siege
continued during the remainder of the summer and into
the autumn, by the middle of which season it was rumoured
that General Cromwell himself was coming to aid in
forcing a capitulation. When I heard this news I
resolved that I would now endeavour to gain some
redress for the wrongs put upon me. I had already
been to my old friend Lawyer Hook, and had told him
all that had happened. But to my story he had given
little heed, saying that at present England was under
military law, and that Cromweil and his troops were
above all ordinary statutes. Now, I believed that
General Cromwell was a just and honest man, and I
resolved that I would go to him, if he came into our
parts, and tell him how I had been treated by Cotterel
and his troops, for I was not minded to sit down calmly
and suffer my serious loss without protest on my part.</p>

<p>It was in November that Cromwell came at the head
of his troopers to take part in the siege of Pontefract
Castle. Soon after his arrival he took up his quarters
at Knottingley, which lies on the riverside over against
Ferrybridge. It was now my time to act, and I accordingly
attired myself in my best and rode along the road
to his quarters, where I presently found him, and was
admitted to his presence. He remembered me at once,
and listened patiently to my complaint, bidding me
speak freely to him. So I took heart and told him all
my story, confessing that I was willing to pay the fine
imposed upon me though I acknowledged not its
justice—but complaining strongly that ten times its
value had been taken from me when I could not help
myself. Moreover, I said that if he and his friends
were anxious to do justice they would give me back my
own. To which he answered that it was for justice he
and his men were fighting, and that they would rob no
man unjustly. Nevertheless, he continued, all must be
done in a proper manner. He then counselled me to go
to London, where he himself would shortly be, and to
there prosecute my claim in due form, promising me
that he would do what he could to aid me in securing
compensation for what I had been despoiled of over and
above my fine; and that I might travel in safety, he
gave me a safe-conduct.</p>

<p>Thus it came about that I made my journey to
London at a time when great events were stirring. It
was not to my liking to leave home again so soon, but
there was Ben to look after my affairs for me, and
it was winter, when things are quiet on the land; so I
decided to go, and ultimately set out for the capital on
the 1st of December, 1648.</p>

<h2>XLII</h2>

<h3>OF THE SCENE BEFORE WHITEHALL</h3>

<p>I spent five days in travelling to London, riding my
own horse all the way, and keeping him up to his
five-and-thirty miles a day by letting him have his fill of
good food and a long night’s rest between each stage of
the journey. To me this adventure was full of novelty
and incident, for I had never been further south than
Sheffield, and knew nothing of England outside my own
county, save what I had seen in the neighbourhood of
the Peak when we went in search of Rose. My eyes,
therefore, had plenty of occupation as I rode along the
Great North Road, which busy highway I followed all
the way to London, passing through the market-towns
of Doncaster, Newark, Peterborough, Huntingdon, and
Hatfield, in each of which I saw something worthy of
notice. My mind, indeed, had never any occasion to
be idle, for there was always some new object or matter
claiming my attention—now a troop of soldiers passing
along the road, or a country squire and his family going
to their seat, now a company of drovers taking their
cattle to Smithfield, and now a Cavalier riding along
with dejected looks. At the inns where I rested o’ nights
there was always plenty of company and no lack of
conversation, but in this I engaged little, being minded
to hold my tongue and let other folk do the talking.
Nevertheless, I kept my ears open to what was said,
being anxious to know what news was being noised
abroad. The talk at all the wayside inns was of the
King, men asking all travellers from London what
tidings there were of his Majesty and what it was
intended to do with him. Anxious, however, as all men
were for news, there were few that ventured on giving
their opinions on these great matters, for the army was
at that time all-powerful, and a man hardly dare speak
what was in his mind for fear of being heard by
someone who might do him an injury.</p>

<p>It was late in the afternoon of the 6th of December when
I came in view of the capital, and passed by the villages
of Edgware and Tottenham on my way to Westminster.
Then indeed I began to wonder exceedingly at the
mightiness of the great city, where everything was new
to me. The crowds going in and out along the streets
filled me with amazement, and the great buildings by
which I rode made me wonder at their size and appearance.
Coming to a halt at the end of the Strand, I was
forced to inquire my way to Westminster, where I
intended to lodge, and was presently conducted by a boy
past Whitehall to a street over against the ancient
abbey, where I found the home of one Master Goodfellow,
who had been recommended to me by Parson
Drumbleforth. There I dismissed my guide, and having
aided my host in stabling my horse, I sat down to my
supper in my lodging, feeling very strange in the middle
of that great city where I knew no one.</p>

<p>Now, this Master Goodfellow with whom I had taken
up my lodging was a verger at the great Abbey of
Westminster, and had been recommended to me as a good
Royalist by our Vicar, who had known him in times past
and had abode with him at the time of his own visit to
London in the year 1637. Master Goodfellow was now
an ancient man, and looked with much sadness on
present events, as he told me while I sat at supper,
having begged him to favour me with his company.
Presently, being convinced that I was faithful to the
King, he began to tell me such news as he had heard
during the day.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis the army,” said he, “that rules everything
nowadays, Master Dale, so men are finding out. For, look
you, the administration of laws is now but an empty
show, for these Roundheads do as they please with
every ancient institution. You have not heard what
they have done to-day?”</p>

<p>“Nay, sir,” I answered, “I am but newly arrived,
having ridden straight to your door.”</p>

<p>“All London is ringing with the news,” he said,
shaking his head sadly, “and the sober citizens know
not what to make of it. For yesterday, Master Dale,
the Commons declared for a reconciliation with the King
his Majesty, which they had a right to do, being the
lawful representatives of the people. But this was not
to the liking of the army, and this morning one of its
leaders, Colonel Pride, went down to the House with a
body of men, and prevented all such members as were
displeasing to the army from entering to their duties.
Yea, and now men are saying, Master Dale, that the
remainder of the members will obey the army in everything.”</p>

<p>Thus, indeed, matters turned out, for within a week
the Commons passed a resolution that the King should
be brought to justice, and he was removed from Hurst
Castle, where the army had had him in safe keeping, to
Windsor, where he was strictly guarded. And after that
men were talking at every street corner and in all the
alehouses of what would be done with his Majesty.</p>

<p>For the first day or two of my abode in London I did
naught but wander about that wonderful city, admiring
the strange sights and places of which I had often heard
travellers talk. Many a time had I listened to Parson
Drumbleforth as he told Jack and me of the great things
he had seen in London town, and now that I saw them
for myself, I was bound to confess that our good Vicar
had not made too much of his story. What London is
like at this present time I know not, for I have never
been near it since that first visit of mine, and after that
it was almost consumed in the Great Fire of 1666, but I
have very clear memories of how it looked in the year
1649. So many places of historic interest were there to
see, that I hardly knew which way to turn when I set
out to view the city, but by Master Goodfellow’s advice
I first inspected the Tower of London, a great and awful
place, strongly guarded and surrounded by impregnable
walls and deep moats, and with the Thames running at
its south side. At this wonderful place I looked many
an hour, only turning from it to admire the great bridge
across the river, upon which houses and shops were
built, and at each end of which stood high, battlemented
gates furnished with portcullises. From this bridge,
too, I watched the river, crowded with ships and vessels
of all sorts and of all nations. Or, passing from that
part of London through crooked, narrow streets, enclosed
by high wooden houses, I made my way to the
great church of St. Paul, whose spire rose high into the
air. Here, too, I was lost in admiration of the famous
cathedral, but I could not avoid thinking that it was
not so beautiful as our own York Minster. All round
St. Paul’s were streets which I was never tired of
exploring and wandering in, such as Cheapside and Bread
Street, where were many shops and houses of citizens,
and inns over whose doors some sign hung to show that
accommodation was there provided for man and beast.
For city life was quite new to me, and the contemplation
of it afforded me much food for my mind, in which,
however, there was always a strong conviction that I
much preferred my own homestead and the green fields
around it to the crowded and narrow streets of the city.</p>

<p>My admiration did not prevent me from attending to
my business, which was to prosecute my claim for
compensation from those who had despoiled me of my goods.
On the day following that of my arrival I went under
Master Goodfellow’s directions to Westminster Hall,
where I found as many lawyers as would have made a
regiment of foot, and by one of these I was directed to
some office where such matters as mine were attended to,
and where, according to General Cromwell’s instructions,
I made a presentation of my case. Now, I had thought
that I had naught to do but state my grievance and have
it redeemed, but I speedily found that there were many
formalities to go through before an end came. For I was
sent from one official to another, and from this office to
that, so that I grew well sickened of the whole affair, and
was minded to return home and forego my claim. But
upon reflection I decided that it would be an unmanly
thing to let myself be robbed in that way, and I therefore
determined to stay and see the matter out. By the time
I had arrived at that conclusion, however, it was close on
to Christmas, and I was informed that naught could be
done for me until the New Year was come. So there I
stayed, wanting and yet not liking to go away, and
spending my time in walking about London and Westminster,
seeing such sights as the great city had to
show. And I spent my Christmas with Master and
Mistress Goodfellow, longing very much on Christmas
Day morning for a sight of home and the dear faces I
had left there.</p>

<p>Now, when the New Year came, there were new affairs
of state to be adjusted, and these were so important that
no man thought of his own business, but watched the
great drama which was being played out before his very
eyes. I could prosecute my own claim no further, for all
the answer I got was that it was under consideration;
but though I was anxious to return home, my curiosity
about such events as were then happening kept me waiting
in London. Those events truly were awful in themselves, for
each led to the deposition and execution of
the King. On the 1st of January the Commons, or rather
that portion of them left by Colonel Pride, appointed
a new tribunal, which they called the High Court of
Justice, to try the King’s majesty on a charge of high
treason against his subjects. Four days afterwards the
same body put forward a declaration that the people
of England were, under God, the source of all just
power, and that the Commons, being the representatives
duly elected of the people, had no need of approval from
either the House of Lords or the King. On the 9th this
High Court of Justice was formally constituted and the
trial of the King definitely arranged for.</p>

<p>There were many who all this time doubted that the
King would really be put upon his trial, for they held
that the sovereign is above the law, and that the army
after all would shrink from carrying matters to such
extremities. But during the next ten days affairs went
forward, and on the 20th his Majesty was brought to
Whitehall for his trial. Then indeed London was in a
state of great excitement, for it was rumoured by some
that the King would be put to death, and by others that
he would be banished across seas. As for all those who
had been true to his Majesty, their hearts were filled
with sorrow to think of his sad condition.</p>

<p>On the morning of the 21st of January Master Goodfellow
and I rose early and made our way to the entrance
of the great hall, where his Majesty was to appear before
the men who had constituted themselves his judges.
There were great crowds about Westminster and Whitehall,
and the Roundhead soldiers were assembled in
much force, as though to check any demonstration in the
King’s favour. By dint of hard work and much pushing
through the crowds we managed to secure places near to
the door by which his Majesty was to enter, and there
we abode very uncomfortably for two or three hours,
swayed hither and thither by the crowd, the members of
which kept up a continual talk and chatter as to what
would take place before the judges. As for me, I wished
I was well out of it, for I was squeezed and shoved
against more than I had a mind for. But at last a great
hush fell over the crowd around us, and a way being
made by the troopers, there appeared a small body of
guards, in whose midst walked the King. And then for
the first time I saw his Majesty Charles the First, in
whose cause I had fought and suffered.</p>

<p>Now, there was a perfect stillness as the King came
along, and the great crowd was motionless save where
some man tried to lift himself high enough to look over
the shoulders of those before him. The King held himself
very erect, and looked into the faces of the crowd
with a calm and serene gaze, so that to me he seemed
the very picture of a high-born gentleman, who knew
naught of fear nor asked for favour. Yet there were
deep lines upon his face, and his hair was thickly
sprinkled with gray, and his eyes had a look of suffering
in them. And so he and his guards went quickly by,
and as they passed there were one or two in the crowd,
myself included, who said heartily, “God save your
Majesty!” upon hearing which the King inclined his
head in our direction and smiled upon us, and entered
the hall. We hung about the entrance that day, listening
to such scraps of news as came from the trial chamber.
First we heard that of the hundred and thirty-five
members of the court only sixty-seven were present, and
that one of these was General Oliver Cromwell. Then
came news that when they called on Fairfax to answer
his name, his lady answered from the gallery that he was
not there and never would be, and that they wronged
him to name him. After that we heard that the King,
on being called upon to answer the charges brought
against him, did deny the authority of that tribunal and
refused to plead. Upon that the trial became naught
but a formality, for the judges had it all their own
way, and finally, on the 27th, they sentenced the King
to death.</p>

<p>It was on the morning of the 30th of January that they
beheaded the King before Whitehall. We rose before it
was light, and at once made our way across the gardens
and parks lying between Westminster and Whitehall, so
that we might come near to the scaffold on which his
Majesty was to die. This they had caused to be erected
in front of the windows of the banqueting hall, and the
carpenters were busy finishing it when we arrived. There
were already great crowds of people gathered together,
and when the sun rose it shone on as sad a scene as ever
I saw. For there was the palace of Whitehall, its roofs
slightly covered with snow, and the trees in its gardens
and courtyards silvered with frost, and against all this
whiteness the black drapery of the scaffold made a dark
blot. Then came the soldiers, musketeers, and pikemen,
and troopers, stern-faced and resolute, and set
themselves to surround the scaffold and to drive the people
back from coming too near it. But I and my companion
had worked our way into a corner at the foot of the
scaffold, and there we were permitted to remain. And
after that an hour went by and the scaffold was empty
save for the block that stood in its midst, and the soldiers
stood motionless and grim, and the great crowd behind
them increased in size until it filled the ground from
Charing Cross to Westminster.</p>

<p>At last a window, looking upon the scaffold, was
thrown open, and a little group of men stepped out and
drew near to the block in the centre. A tall man in
dark clothing, with a mask over his eyes and nose,
carried an axe; another similarly attired accompanied
him, and with these two were several musketeers and an
officer, who posted themselves at the corners of the
scaffold. And then a great and awful silence fell upon
the crowd, for the King appeared at the open window
and stepped upon the scaffold, followed by the Bishop of
London and Colonel Hacker, who had had his Majesty
in keeping. The King was calm and confident, and he
smiled as he looked up at the sky and let his eye travel
across the great multitude, where many a head was
bared. He removed the jewel from his neck and handed
it to the Bishop, to whom he said some last words; then
he stretched himself upon the scaffold, and the uplifted
axe fell swiftly. A deep sigh rose from the great crowd,
and there were hundreds around me that uttered sobs
and cries.</p>

<p>We were close upon the scaffold. A bright jet of
blood spurted across the boards near to me. I raised
my kerchief and dipped it in the King’s blood, and have
it to this day—a memento of that terrible event.</p>

<h2>XLIII</h2>

<h3>OF TWO STRANGE MEETINGS IN ONE DAY</h3>

<p>It was about the middle of the afternoon of that eventful
day that I set out from my lodging in Westminster, and
walked by way of Whitehall towards Charing Cross.
Whither I was bound or with what aim I do not now
remember; most likely I had neither aim nor definite
destination in my mind, but was simply moving about
to calm myself, for the scene of the morning had wrought
upon me heavily. Whatever most of his friends felt,
none of them could exceed me in sympathy for the
unfortunate King; and my heart had been further wounded
during the morning by an account of his last interview
with his two youngest children, which must indeed have
been a bitter matter, and worse to face than the death
which so soon followed. All these matters we had
spoken of at Master Goodfellow’s, until I could bear no
longer to talk of the subject, and had gone forth to walk
about the city. I was half minded to saddle my horse
and ride away from London, for it seemed to me, who
from my birth had been trained to pray for the King’s
good estate, that a curse must rest upon the city that
had witnessed his murder. But I reflected that I had a
duty to perform to myself and my friends—namely, the
recovery of my money—and I resolved to stay a while
longer, but made up my mind that if I got no redress
within reasonable time, I would go home and trouble
myself no more in the matter.</p>

<p>It was beginning to grow dark when I came over
against Whitehall, where groups of people still lingered
about the scene of the King’s death. The scaffold had
by that time been removed, and there were no traces of
the terrible scene of the morning. I was hurrying past
the banqueting house, when a man in a cloak came across
from the gardens which lie between Whitehall and the
river, and walked behind me for a short space. Suddenly
his steps quickened, and he gained upon me and
tapped me on the shoulder. I turned quickly to look at
him. There was an oil-lamp burning close at hand, and
by its light I saw that the man was General Cromwell.
His hat was drawn down over his face, and his uniform
was hidden by a large horseman’s cloak, but there was
no mistaking him when he lifted his head to look at me.</p>

<p>“Well, farmer,” said he, “I knew you, although I could
not see your countenance. There are not many Englishmen
that stand six feet four. Have you finished the
business that brought you hither?”</p>

<p>“No, sir,” I answered, and stood watching him and
wondering what thoughts ran in the mind of this
remarkable man, who, in my opinion, had been the chief
instrument in bringing about the King’s death.</p>

<p>“And how is that? For you have been about your
business some time, I think?”</p>

<p>“Two months, sir, all but a day. And, indeed, I
cannot waste more time upon it, and must presently
return home and suffer the loss of my money rather
than hang about in London.”</p>

<p>“Softly, farmer, softly. It will do the Commonwealth
no good if its citizens suffer loss. As for your fine of
two hundred pounds, that you must lose, being bound
for it by reason of your opposition to the nation’s
welfare, but you shall have returned all that was taken
from you over and above.”</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” said I, “I am much obliged. You would
not have me say that I acknowledge the justice of any
fine, for I don’t, but I shall certainly be glad to have the
value of my stock returned to me. But I have been so
sent from one office to another, and from this man to
that, that I have grown impatient of the whole matter,
not being used to aught but plain yes and no until this
time.”</p>

<p>“Ay,” he said, as if talking to himself, “these lawyers
with their quibbles and quips! However—well, but hast
thou heard aught from thine own country of late? Thy
friends at Pontefract Castle, Master Dale, still hold out
against us. Beware, and join them not when you go home.”</p>

<p>“Nay, sir,” said I, “there is no cause to join them now.
If ever I left my farm it was to fight for the King’s
Majesty.”</p>

<p>He looked at me steadfastly and inclined his head.</p>

<p>“And that cause is now gone? Indeed it is so. Well,
man, I respect an honest heart. But come with me a
moment.”</p>

<p>He laid his hand on my arm and turned me in the
direction of a doorway in the side of the palace. We
entered and passed along a dark corridor which led to a
small courtyard where a picket of soldiers was on duty.
From this we passed into a gallery hung with fine
pictures, such as I had never seen before, and from that
through many great apartments richly decorated, and
looking very vast and magnificent in the dim light, until
we paused before a door where stood two pikemen on
guard. My companion took a lamp from a table that
stood near and advanced to the door, which was thrown
open by one of the soldiers.</p>

<p>“Follow me,” said Cromwell, and entered the room. I
stepped in after him, and the man shut the door again.
The apartment was in darkness, and its proportions
were so vast that the lamp shed but little light in it.
Cromwell advanced to the centre, and, setting down the
lamp upon a table, beckoned me to draw near. And
then I saw that upon the table stood a coffin, covered
over with a dark-coloured pall. While I wondered what
this meant my companion turned the pall back, and I
suddenly started with amazement.</p>

<p>“Sir, sir!” I said. “It is the King!”</p>

<p>For truly it was the body of the dead monarch that
lay there in the coffin before me. His face was calm,
and bore no trace of pain; he seemed, indeed, to be
asleep rather than dead. I stood bound to the spot
with horror, looking from the dead King’s face to the
man who had brought me there, and who was beholding
his fallen enemy with impassive countenance.</p>

<p>“Yea,” said Cromwell at length; it is the King—the
King that betrayed his great trust. Mark you, Master
Dale, what fate is in store for a monarch that opposeth
the just demands of his people. Do you know what this
day hath done for England and the English nation?
It hath made her and them free for ever from tyranny.”</p>

<p>“Alas, sir,” said I, “I know naught save that he had
children that are now weeping his death.”</p>

<p>He gave me a swift, deep glance, and drew the pall
gently back over the dead King’s face.</p>

<p>“Yea,” he said, “there have been many children weep
their father’s death of late years, and many fathers that
have wept their children’s death. Come, let us go.”</p>

<p>He took up the lamp, and touched the dark pall here
and there where it had become disarranged. Then he
looked at me curiously.</p>

<p>“Farmer,” said he, “you see that we have treated
him with all courtesy and respect. What think you, if
they had taken off my head outside this morning, and
the heads of my companions, would they have given us
decent burial? Alack, more like Tyburn and the gibbet,
and the kites to feed upon us.”</p>

<p>I remembered that saying in after-years, when Charles
the Second came back to the kingdom, for then they
disinterred Cromwell and his friends, and subjected their
dead bodies to many foolish and cruel indignities.</p>

<p>We passed out again, and he preceded me through
the great halls and apartments until we once more came
into the space before Whitehall. There he suddenly
turned upon me.</p>

<p>“Get you gone home, Master Dale,” he said, almost
fiercely. “You are better in the country than in this
city. There are more than you that are longing for a
quiet life amongst the woods and fields, but the Lord
hath appointed them to other work. Get you gone, get
you gone, and keep clean hands and a right spirit. As
to your business, it shall be done.”</p>

<p>Without another word he turned away sharply and
disappeared in the direction of Westminster, while I, full
of wonder and excitement at what I had heard and seen,
went forward to Charing Cross, and along the Strand
towards St. Paul’s. The streets were thronged with
people, and every tongue was discussing the event of
the day. The Roundhead soldiery were at every street
corner, and bodies of troopers rode about as if in
readiness for any rising. Here and there in the crowd was
to be seen a Cavalier, distinguished from those among
whom he walked by the difference in his garments and
his long hair. Such, however, were suffered to pass in
silence and unmolested, for the people seemed in no
mood to create disturbances that day.</p>

<p>When I came to Ludgate, I was somewhat faint and
weary with the excitement I had passed through, and I
turned into the inn which has for its sign a holly bush,
and called for ale wherewith to refresh myself. In the
parlour of the inn there was gathered a numerous
company of men—most of them shopkeepers from the
surrounding streets—who had come there to drink their
glass and smoke their pipe of tobacco. Amongst them
I took my seat and listened to the conversation, which
ran entirely on the King’s execution. When I entered,
the whole attention of the company was being given to
two men who were arguing the matter with great heat,
the one being a tall, dark-visaged person of grave air,
and the other a little stout man with a very red face
and quick manners.</p>

<p>“But I say,” said the little man, “that the King’s
execution was illegal; yea, and care not who hears me,
for ’tis well known I have ever been on the side of the
Parliament, and am, moreover, a freeman of the City,
and have a right to say what I think. Yea, I say ’twas
against the liberties of the people, and that I will uphold
for ever.”</p>

<p>“But thy arguments, dear sir, thy arguments,” said
the tall man.</p>

<p>“Marry, here they are. As the law stands, ’tis the
Commons that rule England; which is just law, for,
as I say, away with Princes and Lords, and let the
people have their rights. But if the Commons are to
rule, it must be by a majority of the members. Yea,
but what does Colonel Pride do but shut out all such as
were unfriendly to the plans made by those in command
of the army, so that the remaining members were as
wax in the army’s hands.”</p>

<p>“And rightly,” said the tall man, “for the army hath
saved England, and could not stand by to see the
Commons peril the people’s salvation.”</p>

<p>“Ay, now, there I am with you,” said the little man.
“Yea, I am for the army; but what I say is that, while
the matter was right, it was, also, as a nice point of law,
illegal.”</p>

<p>At this there was a shout of laughter, and the darkfaced
man smiled in spite of his gravity.</p>

<p>“Ah, Master Truelove,” said he, “I see thou art
naught but a stickler for fine points. Thou knowest
well enow that we must look to greater issues at a time
like this, and not stop hair-splitting until opportunities
are lost.”</p>

<p>“That is right enough, neighbour,” said the little man,
not to be beaten out of his argument; “but then, as I
say, the matter is— Hallo, friend, thou seemest to
be in some haste.”</p>

<p>It was I who interrupted him. I had suddenly leaped
to my feet, and my hurried movement upset the tankard
at his side. He looked at me with a half-angry,
half-curious expression, but I had no time to explain
matters to him, and with a hasty expression of regret I
strode across the room and out at the door, where but a
minute sooner I had seen the face of Dennis Watson.</p>

<p>That it was he I had no doubt. I was looking
towards the door of the parlour, listening to the talk
of the little stout man, when I saw Dennis’s head and
shoulders appear round the doorpost. He looked
cautiously into the room, as if in search of someone.
His eyes travelled round the company until they met
mine; then he gave me one swift glance and drew back
his head and vanished.</p>

<p>I was out of the room and in the passage that led to
it almost as soon as he disappeared. He was gone, but
a serving-wench, bearing a trencher full of tankards,
was coming from a room further away, and towards her
I darted impetuously. She gave a little scream as she
saw me advancing so hastily upon her.</p>

<p>“Nay,” said I, “there is naught to be frightened of.
Hast seen a man leave this passage just now?”</p>

<p>“A tall young man, master, with black hair?”</p>

<p>“Yes, yes, “I cried. Which way has he gone, girl?
Tell me, quick!”</p>

<p>“He went through yon door,” she answered, pointing
to a door at the end of the passage. “Follow the lane;
it will take you to the river.”</p>

<p>I had opened the door before she finished speaking,
and running into the night, found myself at the head
of a long narrow lane, enclosed by houses on either
side, the walls of which were so near together that I
could have touched them easily by stretching out my
arms. At the far end of this lane hung a lamp, the
feeble rays of which shed but a small light on the stones
beneath it. All the rest of the lane was dark, and I
could see naught of my quarry, but I heard his feet
running swiftly along the pavement, and immediately
set off after him. Presently I saw him cross the narrow
patch of light underneath the lamp, and I gave a shout
and went forward at a greater speed. In another instant
I, too, had reached the lamp. As I darted into the glare
of it I heard the crack of a pistol, and felt a bullet whiz
past my ear. I gave a fiercer shout at that, and
redoubled my speed, and as I ran I heard my enemy’s
feet sounding before me. The lane was very dark after
that, but I ran on, and presently came out on a little
wharf alongside the river. There was a lamp burning
there, but I could see naught of Dennis, till a gentle
splash of the water drew my attention to the river, and
then I saw that he had leaped into a boat and was
rowing away into the darkness.</p>

<p>Now, I could neither swim nor row, and had never
been in a boat in my life, so that I stood on the edge of
the water cursing my ill luck, while my enemy was
rapidly disappearing. But as fortune would have it,
there just then came along a stout fellow, who, catching
sight of me, made up to my side and asked me if I
wanted taking across to Southwark.</p>

<p>“Nay,” said I; “but do you see yonder boat—there,
just getting out of sight? Follow that, and land me
where the man who is in it lands, and I will pay you
well.”</p>

<p>“Jump in here then, master,” said he. “There is no
better boat than mine on Thames side, nor a stouter
pair of arms. Do you keep t’other boat in sight, and
I’ll engage to catch her up.”</p>

<p>So we shot out into the darkness, and I strained my
eyes to keep sight of Dennis, urging my boatman to row
hard, and promising him a liberal reward if he did not
allow the other boat to get away from us. For my heart
was all afire by that time, and I was resolved that my
enemy should not escape me. He was armed and I was
not, for I had naught upon me but a stout oak staff,
which I had carried with me everywhere in London;
but much as this placed me at a disadvantage with him,
I was determined that I should settle with him once and
for all.</p>

<p>“Are you a sheriff’s man, master?’ asked the boatman
presently, as he strained and tugged at the oars.</p>

<p>“No, friend, “I answered. “I am nobody’s man.
Yonder man is my enemy, and he hath done me bitter
wrongs, to avenge which I have been seeking him this
long time. So pull hard, friend, and don’t let him
escape me.”</p>

<p>“He shall not escape Tom Drewitt,” said the man.</p>

<p>“Not if he pulled like two men. Do you still see him,
master?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” I cried. “We are gaining on him. He is
altering his course—more to the left.”</p>

<p>“He is making for London Bridge, master,” said the
man, swinging his boat round to the north bank of the
river. Make your mind easy; we shall reach the stairs
as soon as he.”</p>

<p>So we went along the dark river, in and out between
the craft that lay at rest there, but never once did my
eyes leave the boat in front, upon which we were steadily
gaining.</p>

<h2>XLIV</h2>

<h3>OF THE FATE OF DENNIS WATSON</h3>

<p>So strongly did Dennis row that he reached the stairs on
the north bank of the river, close upon the head of the
bridge, while we were yet some four boats’ lengths away.
He leaped from his boat and was at the head of the stair
before we reached the foot, and so he disappeared through
an archway that gave access to the bridge.</p>

<p>“Quick, friend!” I cried, as I saw my enemy getting
beyond my reach. “If he is once out of sight I shall
never find him in this great city.”</p>

<p>“He is not escaped yet, master,” said the boatman.
“He cannot pass the north gate without being observed,
and if he turns t’other way you can follow him.”</p>

<p>He bent himself earnestly to the oars as he spoke, and
in another instant the boat grated against the slimy
steps, over which the water was lapping dismally. I
was fumbling for my purse, when the man followed me
from the boat and hooked his craft to a ring in the wall
close by.</p>

<p>“Run on, master,” said he. “Lord love you, I am all
for a bit of adventure myself, and will help you with
this matter. Up the stairs and through the archway.”</p>

<p>We ran to the head of the steps, and, turning through
a deep arch in the great wall, found ourselves on the
bridge immediately beneath the north gate. The keeper
had already closed the portcullis, and was seated in his
lodge half asleep.</p>

<p>“Rouse him up,” said the boatman. “Hallo, Master
Grice, are you already slumbering? Come, has a man
passed through the lodge just now?”</p>

<p>“Not this half-hour,” answered the keeper, “neither
north nor south.”</p>

<p>“What, man, bethink thee! One ran through the
archway from the river steps but this moment.”</p>

<p>“Then a’ turned towards Southwark end,” said the
keeper, and laid his head back against the hood of his
chair; “a’ came not through my lodge, Tom Drewitt.”</p>

<p>“Come,” said the waterman. “We waste time there,
master. Let us go down the bridge.”</p>

<p>We left the lodge and walked quickly away in the
direction of the south gate, looking hither and thither as
we passed between the houses for some sign of the man
we sought. The bridge was but badly lighted, and there
were few people on it, for a light snow had begun to fall
and the cold air was keen and biting.</p>

<p>“He will probably have turned into one of these
houses,” said I, by that time despairing of seeing him
again.</p>

<p>“Maybe so, master,” said the boatman; “but ’tis my
opinion that he will have made for the other end of the
bridge. Let us get down to the gate as sharply as we
can. But stay; let us use some little craft in our design.
Do you, master, walk first and make straight for t’other
gate, and I will come after at a few paces’ distance.”</p>

<p>In this way we pressed forward, I going first, grasping
my staff and looking narrowly into every nook and
corner as I passed. I felt sure that we had lost Dennis,
for the doors of several shops and houses stood open,
and there was naught easier than for him to run inside
one of them and hide himself until we had gone by. It
was impossible for us to search every house; but even if
we had done so, the buildings were so full of holes and
corners that our man might have hid in one room while
we were seeking him in another. Great wooden houses
they were on that bridge, with high gables that projected
over the roadway beneath, so that the eaves formed a
sort of shelter and kept rain and snow from those who
walked beneath them.</p>

<p>I had reached the centre of the bridge, and was
beginning to redouble my pace, when a shout from the
boatman brought me to a halt. As I turned he ran up,
pointing to the door of a tavern which stood open on
our right hand.</p>

<p>“He came out from there as you passed,” said the
man, “and when I shouted he ran across the bridge and
into yon door,” pointing to a house opposite the inn.
“So now, master, we have him caged.”</p>

<p>“Will he escape at the back?” I said.</p>

<p>“Not unless he goes into the river,” answered the
boatman. “Come, we have him now. He has closed
the door behind him, but we will soon remedy that.”</p>

<p>Saying this, he advanced to the house in which Dennis
had taken refuge, and began to knock loudly at the door,
to which there presently came an old man, who opened
it and looked fretfully out at us.</p>

<p>“What do you beat my door so violently for?” he
asked, regarding us with anything but favourable
glances.</p>

<p>“We are sorry to disturb you, master,” said I, “but
there is a man run into your house just now whom we
are in pursuit of, so we will thank you to let us search
for him.”</p>

<p>When I said that the old man looked at us more
suspiciously than ever, and shook his head as if he had
no trust in our tale.</p>

<p>“There is no man run into my house,” said he, and
made as if he would shut the door in our faces. But
the boatman, not to be outdone, placed his foot within
the threshold and began to push his way in. Now, at
this the old man set up a violent clamour, calling for
help, and shouting to those near at hand that thieves
were breaking into his house, so that we presently found
ourselves in the centre of a crowd, every member of
which was asking at the same time what all the uproar
was about.</p>

<p>“Friends,” said I, trying to quiet the old man, who
was still calling out that we were thieves and designed
to rob him, “we are peaceable men enough, and have no
intention of robbing anybody. We are in pursuit of a
man who must be punished for his misdeeds, and we
followed him upon the bridge here and have traced him
to this house, into the open door of which he ran but a
few moments ago. Because we want to search for him
this ancient gentleman calls us thieves.”</p>

<p>“What hath the man done?” asked several near me.</p>

<p>“As much wickedness as half a dozen ordinary men,
sir,” said I, “and hath robbed his own father into the
bargain.”</p>

<p>“Give the rogue no quarter,” said a great burly man.
“Come, let them in, Master Bradley; ’tis poor work
standing against justice. What, man! they will do thy
house no harm.”</p>

<p>“I saw no man run into my house,” said the old
gentleman. “If any man entered he hath run up the
stairs.”</p>

<p>“Let us turn him out of his hole,” said the big man.
“Keep an eye on the windows, some of you, lest he escape
that way. Robbed his father, quotha! Alack, a rope is
too good for such.”</p>

<p>We pressed forward and entered the house and ran up
the stairs, some going into one room and some into
another, while the old man toiled behind us, wringing
his hands and begging us not to harm his goods. But
in none of the sleeping chambers, nor in any nook or
corner on the stairs, could we find a trace of Dennis. I
made my way to the windows overlooking the river, and,
pushing the casement open, looked out. Underneath
me at a great distance lay the water, splashing and
lapping the piles of the bridge, with here and there
a faint gleam of light reflected from the lamps which
gleamed through the windows of the houses. There was
no way by which he could have escaped in the rear of
the house. We turned to the last flight of stairs, which
seemed to lead into the roof of the house, and terminated
in a trap-door. Up these we pushed, only to find the
trap closed and evidently barred from above.</p>

<p>“I warrant me he hath run up here and bolted down
the trap-door,” said the burly citizen, who was blowing
and panting at my side. “He thinketh to escape by the
roofs, no doubt. He— God’s mercy, what voice is
that?”</p>

<p>A great shout came up from the people who had
gathered on the bridge below.</p>

<p>“They see something,” said the boatman. “To the
windows!”</p>

<p>We scrambled down the ladder, and running to the
window which looked upon the bridge, threw it open and
pushed out our heads. Then we saw that the road
beneath was full of people, and that they were all
looking up to the roof of the house opposite that which
we had entered, where stood Dennis Watson, who had
evidently leaped across the gulf that yawned between,
and was now bracing himself for a climb along the tiles
on the other side.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said the boatman, “I see what he is after,
master. He is making for the rear of the tavern,
where there is a stair which leads to the river. There
are always boats fastened to the pier underneath the
tavern, and he will go down the stair and escape in one.”</p>

<p>And with that he ran down to the bridge and made
for the inn, while I and the men that had followed us in
remained at the window watching my enemy’s movements. He
was climbing along the roof of the opposite
house with very careful steps, for the tiles and the
woodwork were slippery with snow, and the roof sloped
dangerously. Presently he came to a part where there
was naught to hold by, and rose to his feet and balanced
himself on the uncertain edge of the roof. When I saw
him in this perilous position I was minded to shout to
him to return and meet me in fair fight, for I had no
wish to see him dash himself to pieces. But before I
could open my lips there was a sudden gust of icy wind
blew down the river and caused him to stagger. His
foot seemed to slip on the snow-covered roof; he made
a great effort to recover his balance; then he slipped
further and further, and finally fell over the edge of the
gable, and came to the bridge beneath with a heavy
sound that turned me sick.</p>

<p>“He hath escaped you, master,” said the big man at
my side. “He is gone where you cannot catch him.”</p>

<p>We hurried down the stairs and found a crowd
surrounding the body. Dennis Watson was dead enough,
for he had fallen some fifty feet and lighted upon his
head. Bitterly as he had wronged me and mine, I could
not avoid feeling sorry for him as I saw him lying there
with the folks pushing their way through the crowd to
stare at him. But there was little time for feelings of
that sort, for the watch had now appeared on the scene,
and when they had removed the dead man’s body I was
forced to go with them and say what I knew about him,
upon which business I was detained some time, and did
meanwhile learn some particulars concerning Dennis
Watson’s history since the time of his flight from our
neighbourhood. For it seemed that the people of the
inn to which his body was carried were somewhat
acquainted with him, and reported that when he first
used to come to their house he was gaily dressed, and
did make much show of money and led a dissolute life,
but that of late he had lived a precarious existence, and
had been suspected of being concerned in the doings of a
band of thieves who infested the riverside. From which
news I gathered that the money he had stolen from his
father had done Dennis Watson no good, and that he
had been amply punished for that and all his other
misdeeds. Now, they found no money on his body, and
were for burying him like a pauper, but I did not like to
think that the son of a Yorkshire yeoman should have
no better burial than what is given to a dog, and I
accordingly paid for his grave myself and saw him
decently interred, having no quarrel with him now that
he was dead.</p>

<p>I was busied with these matters during the next two
days, but on the 2nd of February, being the third day after
the King’s execution, I said farewell to Master Goodfellow
and his wife and set forth upon my journey homeward,
being well satisfied to depart from London, which great
city I admired vastly, but had no very pleasant memories
of. You may be sure that I was glad enough at the
thought of seeing Dale’s Field and my dear love again,
and as I rode along the road I made up my mind that
we would waste no more time, but call Parson Drumbleforth’s
services into requisition and be married out of
hand. And that done, I would leave my home no more,
neither for King nor Commons, but would attend to my
business and find my pleasure in my own land and my
own house as a yeoman should. For by that time I had
had enough of war and turmoil and of adventures here
and there, and it seemed to me that there was naught
like a quiet life. And therewith I fell at meditating on
what General Cromwell had said to me about there being
other folk than myself that did desire to live peaceably
on their farms but were called to other things, and I
decided that such were more to be pitied than envied.</p>

<p>I spent the first night of my homeward journey at
Hitchin, and went forward the next day to Huntingdon,
where I slept the second night, and until this point I
met with no adventure worth recording. As for the
talk at the inns, it was of naught but the King’s death,
respecting which every man was willing to converse, but
few to venture an opinion. I said naught on the matter,
being anxious to escape questions, which would certainly
have been showered upon me if I had admitted that I
was present at the scene before Whitehall. That scene,
indeed, was never out of my mind, and I dreamed of it
more than once during the next few weeks.</p>

<p>On the third day of my journey, when I was drawing
near to Peterborough, I saw before me on the roadside
the figure of a man who lay stretched out on the bank as
if he were ill or dead, while his horse stood near him
cropping the grass. It was a cold, raw afternoon, and I
immediately concluded that the man had fallen from his
horse and was now insensible, or he would never lie
there in such peril of his life. So I rode up to him, and,
dismounting, bent down to see what it was that ailed
him. There was something familiar in his countenance,
but I took little heed of it at the moment, for the man
was insensible and blue with cold, and looked death-like
to my mind. Now, I had in my saddle-bag a small flask
of strong waters which Mistress Goodfellow had pressed
upon me, and I immediately produced this and poured a
little of its contents between the man’s lips. At first
there seemed to be no effect, but presently he sighed
deeply and opened his eyes somewhat, so that I
redoubled my exertions and strove hard to bring him to.
While I was thus engaged I had leisure to study his face,
and then I saw that he was the man who had knocked
at the door of the wayside inn between Aberford and
Castleford, and had manifested such uneasy symptoms
at sight of me.</p>

<p>In a few minutes the man opened his eyes and looked
at me. The light was already failing, but it was
sufficiently strong to allow of his recognising me, and
again I saw the horrified look come into his face which I
had first seen when I opened John Sanderson’s door to him
that morning after my release from the Parliamentarians’
camp before York. It was a look of such fear as I never
saw on any other man’s face, and was all the worse to
me because I did not understand it.</p>

<p>“Come, master,” said I, “there is no need to look so
frightened; I am neither thief nor cut-throat, and desire
naught but your good. Have you fallen from your horse
that you lie here like this?”</p>

<p>“Ay,” said he faintly. “I am ill, dying, sir, I think,
this three days. Ride on, good sir, and leave me.”</p>

<p>“Nay, friend,” I answered, “I shall not leave you till
you are in some safe hands. Come, we are but a mile or
two out of Peterborough, so let me help you to your
horse, and I will walk by your side till we reach the
town.”</p>

<p>And therewith I raised him up and made him take
another drink of the strong waters, and so got him to his
horse at last, and walked by his side to support him,
leading my own horse by the bridle. In this way we
went forward to Peterborough, the man now and then
groaning with pain, and at times looking at me with the
same look of fear in his face which had come there as
soon as he had opened his eyes and seen me bending
over him.</p>

<h2>XLV</h2>

<h3>OF THE STRANGE MAN’S CONFESSION</h3>

<p>By the time we reached the inn where I had stayed
when I passed through Peterborough on my journey to
London, the stranger’s illness was much increased, so
that it was all I could do to keep him upright upon his
horse. The host of the inn was at first opposed to
admitting him; for the man, he said, looked like death,
and he wanted no death in his house. Upon my promising
to pay him well for whatever trouble he and his were
put to, he altered his tone, and we presently carried the
sick man to a chamber which they had hastily made
ready for him, and there he was laid in bed while the
ostler went to seek the apothecary.</p>

<p>Having thus seen my charge comfortably disposed of,
I made my way to the inn parlour and gave orders for
my supper, for which I had gotten a keen appetite.
While they made it ready I fell a-musing by the hearth,
my mind being full of the strange events of the last few
days. Never had I passed through such exciting
incidents as those which occurred on the day of the
King’s execution. To see his Majesty suffer was terrible
enough, but I think the death of Dennis Watson had
moved me even more than the scene before Whitehall.
For bitterly as he had wronged me, and bound as I was
to punish him, I could not help reflecting upon the
change which had come over him since the time he left
his father’s house. In the old days he had been a
fine-looking man, whom the maidens were wont to admire
for his handsome countenance, and at that time I do not
think he would have run away from me or from any
other man. But when I saw him dead at my feet I
noticed that his good looks were gone, and his face was
worn and discoloured by hard living and drinking, and
his hair was thickly shot with gray; and I reflected that
he had not had spirit to meet me fairly, but must needs
fly from me like a thief, whereby he met his ignominious
death. Yet his old craft and malice had been strong in
him till the end, for he had striven to shoot me as I
followed him down the dark alley. However, he was
now dead, and had come to his end in a shameful
manner, and so he would never more trouble me or mine.</p>

<p>While I thus mused the apothecary came downstairs
from visiting the sick man, and made his way to me. He
was a short, stout gentleman, carrying a snuff-box in his
hand, the lid of which he frequently tapped while he was
speaking. He took a seat near me and spread out his
plump legs to the fire.</p>

<p>“Your friend, sir,” said he, “is very sick. How long
hath he been in his present state?”</p>

<p>“Indeed, sir, “I answered, “I know little more about
him than you do. I found him lying by the roadside
two miles away, with all his senses gone, and had hard
work, I assure you, to get him to his horse again.”</p>

<p>“Then, he is no friend of yours?” said he.</p>

<p>“No,” said I. “I once saw him, some four years ago,
at a wayside inn, but more than that I know not. I
neither know his name, nor where he comes from, nor
where he was going.”</p>

<p>“Ah!” said the apothecary. “Well, sir, the man is
going to die. He will be dead before the afternoon is
over.”</p>

<p>“Yea,” said the landlord, who had come over to where
we sat. “That is just what I said. However, master,
you will see that I am paid for my trouble?”</p>

<p>“I shall keep my word,” I answered, and set to work
at my supper, which was just then placed before me.</p>

<p>“I can do naught for the man,” said the apothecary.
“So if you will pay me my fee, master, I will go home
again.”</p>

<p>And therewith, haying got his money, away he went,
and I was left with the sick man on my hands, and the
prospect of being delayed a day or two on my journey.
This was not agreeable to my wishes; but I remembered
that I could not have left the man on the roadside to die,
so I ate my supper in peace and resolved to see the
matter out.</p>

<p>When the apothecary had gone his ways, I had
persuaded the hostess to go up to the sick man’s
chamber and stay with him, for it seemed hard to me
that he should be left alone when death was so near him.
So away she went, but came back before I had finished
eating to tell me that the man was in a sad way, and
wished to speak with me at once.</p>

<p>Upon entering the chamber in which we had put him
to bed, I found the sick man sitting upright against his
pillow. His senses had now come back to him, and he
seemed as much alive to what was going on around him
as I was. But when I drew near to the bedside and
inquired what I could do for him, the same look of horror
and fear came into his eyes which I had noticed on other
occasions, and he shrank away from me as though he
feared that I was going to strike him.</p>

<p>“Now, friend,” said I, speaking as kindly as I knew
how, because he was a dying man, “what can I do for
you?”</p>

<p>He opened his lips to speak, and then closed them
again and gasped for breath, his eyes all the time
keeping themselves fixed on me with the same frightened
look.</p>

<p>“Come, “I said, “there is no need for fear. Tell me
what you want, and I promise you shall have it.”</p>

<p>“Alas, Master Dale!” said he, “you are very kind to
me, and I deserve none of your kindness. Sir, fetch me
some clergyman, and let me talk to him. I cannot die
until I have eased my mind.”</p>

<p>“If that be all,” I answered, “your wishes shall be
gratified on the instant;” and I went down to the host
and told him what was desired.</p>

<p>“Why now,” said he, “let me see, there is Master
Budgett and Master Brewer, that are both godly men
and have their churches close at hand.”</p>

<p>“Let it be Master Brewer,” said the hostess.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis an elderly man and hath the prettiest way with
him, sir, at a death-bed. La now, our Marian shall run
for his reverence in a trice, and I lay he will come at
once, whether he be at prayers or meat.”</p>

<p>So the girl ran straightways for good Master Brewer,
and I went back to the sick man, who sat plucking at
the bed-clothes with his fingers.</p>

<p>“There,” said I, “we have sent for a clergyman, and he
will come to you presently, so you may make yourself
easy on that score;” and therewith I sat down in the
window to wait until the parson came, so that the man
might not be alone. But all the while I sat there he
said no word, only his eyes continually rested on me,
and his fingers never ceased plucking at the sheets.</p>

<p>Now, the girl Marian let no grass grow under her feet,
but ran quickly to Master Brewer’s vicarage, which was
not many hundred feet away, so that but a few minutes
passed before the hostess came up the stairs and ushered
the worthy Vicar into the sick man’s presence.</p>

<p>“This way, your reverence,” quoth she. “Alas! the
poor gentleman hath been very particular to see your
reverence and talk with you for his soul’s health. Pray
God he make a good end—as, indeed, he cannot fail to
do with your reverence to attend him. But here is the
poor gentleman—how do you find yourself now, sir?—so
I will leave your reverence to talk with him for his
benefit.”</p>

<p>“Good mistress,” said I, for she showed no signs of
suspending her remarks, “let us go downstairs, as you
say, and leave this good gentleman and the sick man alone
together;” and therewith I got her out of the chamber
and conducted her downstairs, so that the parson and
the stranger should be private.</p>

<p>“Alack! “quoth she, as we reached the parlour, “I
fear me the poor man is not long for this world. Will
it be a crowner’s quest matter, think you, master?”</p>

<p>“Nay, mistress, I cannot say. The man is not dead yet.”</p>

<p>“An a’ hath not death in a’s face I never saw one that
had,” said the host. “Yea, and may think a’s self lucky
that a’ died not by the roadside.”</p>

<p>While the clergyman was occupied with the sick man
I sat in the chimney-corner and smoked a pipe of
tobacco, which habit I had contracted during my stay in
London, having been inducted into it by Master Goodfellow.
For many a time when I was in that great city
I felt lonely and needed something to warm my heart,
for which complaint Master Goodfellow recommended
tobacco-smoking as being a capital remedy. And such
I truly found it, and carried home with me a great
supply of that blessed herb, which is one of man’s
chiefest treasures, whatever King James may have said
to the contrary.</p>

<p>Now, Master Brewer was engaged with the dying man
for a long time, so that I smoked two pipes, and was
just thinking of filling a third, when he came down
the stairs and approached me. Then I noticed that
his face was very grave, and that he looked at me
narrowly, as if he wished to know what manner of man
I was.</p>

<p>“Let us go into some private room, Master Dale,” said
he. “I have something of consequence to say to you.”</p>

<p>“Come you into the little parlour, your reverence,”
said the landlady. “I warrant you might talk secrets
there for a month o’ Sundays without anyone being the
wiser.”</p>

<p>So into the little parlour we went, and closed the door,
and the clergyman, who was old and gray, and not
unlike our own parson in soberness of appearance turned
to me.</p>

<p>“Master Dale,” said he, still looking gravely at me,
“Master Dale, I trust you are a Christian man.”</p>

<p>“Why, sir,” said I, “I trust I am, though I dare say
there is room for improvement in me. Certainly, I have
always tried to do my duty.”</p>

<p>“You will need to exercise a very Christian virtue,”
said he, “when you hear what I have got to tell you.”</p>

<p>“What virtue is that, your reverence?”</p>

<p>“The virtue of forgiveness, Master Dale. Yon poor
soul, that is near drawing his last breath, would have
you forgive him before he goes before his Great Judge.”</p>

<p>“Would have me forgive him, sir? Alas! the poor
soul, he is out of his mind. He hath never injured me.”</p>

<p>“Are you so sure of that? Is there no wrong ever
done to you and yours which presents itself to your
mind?”</p>

<p>“No, sir,” I said, shaking my head, “I cannot say that
there is—at least, not that this man could have aught
to do with. The poor man must be out of his mind,
your reverence. I have seen him but twice in all my
life, and upon each of those occasions he manifested
lively fear of me—why, I know not.”</p>

<p>“Master Dale, look back. Is there nothing in your
past life that is as yet an unsolved riddle? Did it never
strike you that this man had some reason for showing
such signs of fear when he set eyes upon you?”</p>

<p>“Sir, “I answered, “I am, I dare say, very stupid and
thick-headed, and, to tell the truth, I troubled myself
very little about the man and his fancies.”</p>

<p>“Did it never strike you that he feared you because of
your extraordinary resemblance to some other person?”</p>

<p>“The only man, sir, that I resemble was my own
father, who was my very image. But why should that
make the man afraid? I dare say he has seen my
father at some time or other, but why should my
resemblance to him frighten the poor soul?”</p>

<p>“Why, indeed? Because of a guilty conscience.
Master Dale, be strong to hear what I have to tell you.
The man who is dying in yonder chamber is your
father’s murderer!”</p>

<p>My father’s murderer! The words sounded in my
ears as if they were not real. The walls seemed to fall
away from me, my brain went round in a sickening whirl.
I stretched out my arms to save myself from falling.</p>

<p>“Come, Master Dale, be brave, and quit you like a
Christian man. Oh, I promise you this most unfortunate
wretch hath paid dearly for his fell crime.”</p>

<p>“Sir, sir!” I cried. “I cannot believe it—it seems
impossible. What had my father done to offend this
villain?”</p>

<p>“Alas! naught. Master Dale, the man upstairs was
paid to murder your father by one who was your father’s
enemy—Rupert Watson.”</p>

<p>At last! Thank God, the secret was out at last!
Now I knew whom I had to thank for the foul deed that
made me fatherless and my mother a widow. Whose
hand it was that fired the fatal shot mattered little: I
knew at last, after all those years of waiting, whose
devilish malice it was that prompted the deed; I knew
in whose evil mind the devilish plans were worked out
and put in operation. It was as I had always thought.
There was no surprise in my mind at the news. But at
last I knew my enemy without doubt or question, and
could go to my revenge with a clear purpose.</p>

<p>My mind was clear once more, my nerves strung
themselves like quivering steel. I moved to the door.</p>

<p>“Where are you going, Master Dale?” asked the
clergyman.</p>

<p>“To the magistrate, sir, ere yonder villain dies.”</p>

<p>“Master Dale, bethink you! This is no time for
earthly feelings of revenge—the man is dying.”</p>

<p>“Sir, if he were at the very gates of hell, and the
evil one were waiting to receive him, he should not
escape me now! On my dead father’s body I swore to
God in Heaven that whoever had part or lot in that foul
murder should account to me for it with their lives.
Shall I forget my vow? God forbid!”</p>

<p>“Alas! Master Dale, your words are hard. Oh, my
son, think, I pray you, of the terrible bar before which
this unhappy wretch must shortly plead. What is
any earthly tribunal in comparison with that of God?
What good purpose can you serve by tormenting your
father’s murderer for an hour or two before death seizes
him? Master Dale, this unhappy man hath made full
confession to me of his whole life, and hath charged me
with the duty of imploring your forgiveness. Already
you have heaped coals of fire upon his head by your
good treatment of him.”</p>

<p>“Sir,” said I, “an he had been my worst enemy,
Rupert Watson himself, I should have done no less for
him. But justice must surely be done on such as he.
Think of the foul deed he did.”</p>

<p>“I think of naught else, Master Dale, and it is because
his sin hath been so great that I plead for your great
forgiveness. Will you not die easier yourself for the
knowledge that you forgave all your enemies?”</p>

<p>Before I could answer him there came a great knocking
at the door, and the hostess entered, looking very
scared, and begged us to go up to the man at once, for
he was at his last gasp.</p>

<p>We entered the room, I with such feeling at my heart
as I cannot describe. The man lay gasping for breath;
his eyes were closed, and his face was covered with great
drops of sweat. We bent over him; he suddenly
opened his eyes and saw me, and across his features
there came the same look of awful fear. He half raised
himself in his bed and made as if he would speak; then
he fell back dead, and so passed to his great account.</p>

<p>That night Master Brewer told me such particulars
as the dead man had desired him to make known to me,
and thus I learnt the true history of my father’s murder.
The man in his youth had been a wild and lawless
character, and had committed many crimes, for which
the law had punished him in various ways. At the
York assizes, whereat our case with Rupert Watson was
tried, he had been charged with horse-stealing, and had
gotten off. Riding southward from York, he had fallen
in with Rupert, who found him a willing abettor of the
foul plot he had devised as he followed my father
homeward. At Ferrybridge Rupert had shown him the man
he wished to slay, and thereupon the murderer rode
forward to the lonely piece of road, where he lay in
wait for and slew my father, being at that time of such
a disposition that murder was naught to him. But if all
that he confessed to Master Brewer were true, he had
been punished hard enow for his sins in the years that
followed that horrible deed.</p>

<h2>XLVI</h2>

<h3>OF OUR PREPARATIONS FOR THE WEDDING</h3>

<p>I entered upon the final stages of my homeward
journey with very different feelings from those which
had filled me when I left London. When I rode away
from Master Goodfellow’s house I thought of little else
than the gladness of being at home once more with the
dear familiar faces of my friends around me. But when
I left Peterborough I had no thought of them, or of the
joys of reaching home again. All I wanted and all I
thought of, was to come at Rupert Watson and settle my
account with him. My heart was filled with impatience
because of him. Every mile seemed the length of three
miles, and never until then had I dealt so unsparingly
with my horse. I pushed forward at a quicker rate than
when I had ridden southwards; and though I was forced
to stay one night at Newark, I got no benefit from it,
for I spent the hours in walking my chamber floor, and
was in the saddle again long before the people of the inn
were stirring.</p>

<p>Until that time, indeed, I had never known what it
was to be so completely filled with the passion of revenge
that there was no room for any other feeling or thought
in my heart. So resolved was I to do justice to my
father’s murderer that I put everything else out of my
mind. I thought of the sorrow brought upon me and
mine by that foul deed. I recalled every incident of the
horrible scene on the snow-covered highway, until the
picture became present to my eyes, and would not be
shut out. I saw my father laid rigid and lifeless in the
snow, myself bending over him in an agony of fear and
grief, while the horses stood by with their heads bent
towards us as if they shared in my sorrow. I saw my
mother standing in the open doorway with the warm
firelight glowing behind her, and remembered the awful
woe that stole like a shadow across her face as she heard
the news of her husband’s murder. These matters filled
my mind to the exclusion of every other thought as I
rode homewards, and above them rose a fierce
determination to meet Rupert Watson and pay him the debt
I had owed him for all those years.</p>

<p>It was about the middle of the afternoon when I got
my tired horse up the hill out of Wentbridge, and came
in sight of the tall chimneys of my house. I had grown
in impatience as I drew near home, but my horse,
wearied by the hard work I had given him, had turned
lame, and it was all I could do to push him forward over
the last two or three miles. If I had never met the
strange man, and had never learnt his secret, I should
have had no other thought, on the nearing my house,
but of my sweetheart, and the pleasure of reaching home
again. But with that story in my breast, I could think
of none of those things. Not a single thought of Rose
nor of home-coming was in me as I drew near to Dale’s
Field. My heart was dead to all but its one desire.</p>

<p>I drew rein at the orchard gate and dismounted. As
I lifted the latch Ben Tuckett, who was busied in the
fold, caught sight of me, and came over the wall to
welcome me.</p>

<p>“Well met, lad!” said Ben, his face all aglow at the
sight of me. “Thou art come at a good time. There
is Parson Drumbleforth in the house, and it is not five
minutes since we were all talking of thee, and
wondering when thy travels would come to an end. All is
well, thank God, and we have been as quiet as mice
since thou didst ride away. And now let me take thy
horse and get thee into the house. Hah! thou seest
the lasses have already caught sight of thee.”</p>

<p>And so they had, and now came running out of doors
to meet me, with the Vicar following in their rear.
Then for one moment I forgot the black sorrow that was
eating out my heart, for what man could resist loving
looks and the welcome of rosy lips and bright eyes?
But when I had greeted them all round and followed
them into the house, the passion that filled me asserted
itself again, for it seemed to me that the place was filled
with memories of my dead father, and that his ghost
cried in my ears for vengeance on his murderers.</p>

<p>Presently in came Ben, full of talk as usual, and
began to question me. But quick as his tongue wagged,
I heard naught of it, being lost in those sad memories,
so that at last he ceased to speak, and sat staring at me
in wonder. Then I saw that the girls were watching me
with surprised looks, and that Parson Drumbleforth
regarded me with a wistful glance, as if he wondered
what ailed me.</p>

<p>“Beshrew me, Will!” said Ben, suddenly breaking
the silence, “what is the matter with thee? Hast not
had a smile for one of us since thou didst ride in at the
gate, nor a word either. Here we have been talking to
thee, and questioning thee, and begging for news of
what thou hast seen and heard, and there thou standest
and takest no heed. Hast seen a ghost, man, that thou
lookest so strangely! “</p>

<p>Then I came to my wits, and begged their pardon,
and told them that I was glad enough to see them all
again, and would tell them all my news when I had
gotten a terrible weight off my mind. And then, while
they all stood round with wondering faces, I told them
all that I had learned concerning my father’s death.</p>

<p>“So now, I said, when I had come to the end of my
story, “you see why I looked and behaved in such a
manner. Indeed, I can neither eat nor drink nor sleep
until I have met my father’s murderer face to face. Let
me see my vengeance satisfied and I shall be myself
again.”</p>

<p>“Lad, lad!” said Parson Drumbleforth, “remember
what is said in Holy Writ: ‘Vengeance is Mine; I will
repay, saith the Lord.’ Truly He will give to every man
according to his deeds.”</p>

<p>I turned my face away impatiently. I was in no mood
for conversation of that sort. Holy Writ or no Holy
Writ, nothing on earth should cheat me of my revenge.</p>

<p>“That is all very well, sir,” I answered somewhat
impatiently, for I was in no mood for counsel. “But I
vowed to God at my dead father’s side that I would
avenge his murder, and now no power in heaven or earth
shall prevent me.”</p>

<p>“God forgive thee thy impious words, lad,” said the
old man. “Thou art young and of hot blood, and dost
not think of what thou art saying. Will, Will, what can
vengeance of thine do? Can it bring the dead to life?
Can aught that thou canst invent of torture equal the
horrors of conscience which yonder guilty wretch hath
carried in his bosom all these years? Remember, lad,
that we are commanded to forgive all our enemies, even
as we would be forgiven.”</p>

<p>“Sir, sir! “I cried, being well-nigh stung to madness
by the conflicting passions in my breast, “you are asking
more of me than man can do. If I were a saint I might
forgive, but I am a man. Forgive? Not till I have
seen him suffer for his crime. Yea, and then it would
be harder than I could bear.”</p>

<p>“Canst thou not, then, trust in God to punish thy
enemy?”</p>

<p>“Let God make me the means! Sir, you mean well,
but I will not be put off from my work. Whether it be
the will of God or not, naught but death shall stay me
from this matter.”</p>

<p>I moved towards the door, but before I reached it I
turned back. Over the great fireplace hung the pistols
which my father had carried on that fatal ride from
York. One of them was stained with his blood. I took
it down and loaded it carefully, while the rest stood
round with never a word to say. Then I put it inside
my coat and turned to the door.</p>

<p>With my hand on the latch there came a touch on
my arm. I looked down and saw Rose looking
pleadingly at me. Her eyes were full of entreaty.</p>

<p>“For my sake, dear Will! Listen to what the Vicar
says. For my sake!”</p>

<p>She had never looked one half so beautiful as at that
moment, and the touch of her gentle hands about me
almost drove me to repent of my fierce anger. But then
my hand touched the pistol stained with my father’s
blood, and my passion welled up again with tenfold
force. I put her from me gently, but firmly.</p>

<p>“Not even for thy sake, dear heart!” I groaned.
“Not even if thy love were the price I must pay.”</p>

<p>And with that I raised the latch and would have left
them and gone on my mission, for my feelings had
overpowered me and turned me into a murderer. But
the Vicar cried “Stay!” in a loud voice, and I paused and
stood staring at him.</p>

<p>“Lad,” said he solemnly, lifting his hand as he spoke—
“lad, thou couldst not trust in God to avenge thee.
Learn, then, that while thou wert speeding hither to
wreak thy vengeance, God’s hand hath forestalled thee.
The vengeance of God hath already fallen. Rupert
Watson is beyond thy reach!”</p>

<p>“Dead!”</p>

<p>I scarcely knew my own voice as I cried out. It was
a voice of baffled rage, of passion that had fed on itself
and found itself baulked of its purpose.</p>

<p>“Dead to thee. Dead to repentance. Dead—unless
God give him grace to any chance of atoning for his
sins. Go, Will—go across yonder woods to Castle Hill.
Ask for thy enemy. Thou wilt find an old man, blind,
deaf, and mad. He hath lost sight, hearing, and senses.”</p>

<p>Then a mist swam before my eyes, and I sank into a
seat and hid my face. Truly the hand of God had been
beforehand with me, and had taken from me the work I
had set myself to do. And so my father was avenged;
and I learnt that, whether men believe it or not,
there is naught done in this world, either good or evil,
the results of which do not in time come back to the doer.</p>

<p>After my return home some weeks passed by in an
uneventful manner. The Royalists were still defending
Pontefract Castle against General Lambert and the
Parliamentarians, having proclaimed Charles II as soon
as they heard of the death of Charles I. Jack Drumbleforth
was with them, and naught had been seen or heard
of him since I set out for London. By the beginning of
March in that year—1649—the defenders of the Castle
saw that they had no chance of holding out against the
Roundheads, and they began a series of negotiations
with the besiegers, the result of which was that the
Castle was finally surrendered to the Parliament before
the end of the month. It was the last place in England
to hold out for the King, and after its surrender the
victorious army resolved that it should no more be
available against their cause, for they demolished it
with no mercy, so that it is now naught but a great heap
of ruins.</p>

<p>So now the land in our neighbourhood was fairly
quiet, and the townsfolk in Pontefract began to repair
the damage done to their property during the course of
the siege. Things began to assume their old appearance,
and life was pretty much what it was before the
war broke out. Then Ben Tuckett grew restless and
uneasy, and finally declared that he would go home and
repair his house, and buy in a new stock, and devote
himself to his own trade once more.</p>

<p>“And when my house is all ready, Will,” said he, “we
will be married, and I will take Lucy home, for, indeed,
it is high time we were settled down to the sober
business of life. I think the wars are safely over, and
that I may dig up my money from under the hearthstone.”</p>

<p>So it was duly settled amongst us that we would be
married on the coming Easter Monday, and thereupon
everything was bustle and preparation for the wedding.
As for Ben, he went away to his home in the Marketplace
at Pontefract, and inspected the damage it had
suffered during the siege, which was not quite so great
as he had feared, though a cannon-shot had indeed
passed through the roof and caused much falling of
bricks and mortar. Honest Ben, however, set to work
with a right good will, and laboured so hard that his
house speedily resumed something of its ancient air of
solid respectability. When the outside was finished and
the whole place made weathertight, Ben moved into it
his furniture, which had been carried over to Dale’s
Field when he went into the Castle, and with it were
sent such things as my mother had promised Lucy
against her marriage, these being matters of chairs
and tables and bedding, together with such piles of
linen as you would have thought they could never wear
out. Then there was much arranging of chambers and
parlours, and Lucy and Rose were at Ben’s house for a
day together, so that finally Ben was in a grand state of
readiness to receive his bride.</p>

<p>As for me, there were no great preparations to make
at Dale’s Field, for the house was already fitted for its
new mistress. There was not a corner of it that she
did not know by that time, nor an acre of the
surrounding fields and meadows that she had not crossed
in company with me. The old place was as familiar to her
as to me, and when she came home from church with me
on the wedding-day it would only be in name that there
would be any difference in the new mistress of Dale’s
Field. Yet those last few weeks before our marriage
seemed long to me, who had waited a long time for my
love and had often been parted from her for long intervals.
Bit by bit, however, they slipped away, and at last the
day drew near which was to make us one.</p>

<p>Now, all that week before the wedding they were as
busy as bees at Dale’s Field, for there was the wedding
dinner to think for and provide, and Jacob Trusty
insisted on having the great barn cleared for a dance
and a supper to the men and their families, and Timothy
Grass worked hard to have the garden put in order, and
the maids scrubbed and swept until neither Ben nor I
could find a corner wherein to rest our weary limbs.
Much of that week, indeed, we spent at Pontefract with
the tailor, who was making us exceeding fine raiment
wherein to be married. The tailor, indeed, was as busy
a man as you could have found in the three kingdoms
that week, for he was also making new garments for
Jack Drumbleforth and Tom Thorpe, who were going to
act as best men. But with all this business and
preparation it was a long week, and seemed to move
with tender feet until Easter Sunday dawned upon us.</p>

<h2>XLVII</h2>

<h3>OF MY LAST MEETING WITH RUPERT WATSON</h3>

<p>It was one of the most beautiful days I ever remember
to have known, that Easter Sunday of 1649, for it was
all sunshine and springing of flowers, and yet it went by
surely in slower fashion than ever day did before. I
was out and about early in the morning, and found the
dew lying bright on the grass and the sunlight flooding
the woods and meadows that stretch before my house.
The trees were bursting into new leaf, and the
garden—looking very smart and trim, thanks to Timothy
Grass—was gay with primrose and crocus. I wandered about
the fold and the buildings, thinking of what great
happiness the morrow was to bring me, until the house
door opened and Ben Tuckett came out and joined me.</p>

<p>“Heigho!” said Ben. “It seems a long time until tomorrow,
Will. Would that old Father Time could jog
on a little faster!”</p>

<p>“Have patience, Ben,” said I.’Twill soon be noon,
and soon it will be night, and then morning will dawn
again and the great day will arrive.”</p>

<p>“Yea,” he answered, but these last few hours seem
exceeding long. I do not think I have slept three hours
this night, and I am very sure I shall not sleep at all
this coming night, for I shall lie awake considering of
my new responsibilities. ’Tis a serious matter, this
marrying business, Will.”</p>

<p>“Art thou afraid?”</p>

<p>“Marry, not I. But for all that ’tis, as I say, a serious
thing. Thou seest, a man till he marries hath but himself
to care for, but when he is wed he never knows to
what extent his care will go. However, I am willing
enough to offer myself a victim at the altar.”</p>

<p>“I believe you, Ben. You have been a faithful wooer.”</p>

<p>“Ever since I was a lad and used to come home with
thee at holiday times. Yea, I have served my
apprenticeship to this same love for as many years as
Jacob served for Rachel. But the last days of the
apprenticeship go very slowly, lad, and I would it were
to-morrow, and Parson Drumbleforth had tied us up as
securely as ring and book can do it.”</p>

<p>Not all the wishing in the world, however, could make
the day go a whit faster, and we were fain to get it over
in such patience as we could. For my own part, I would
have spent it in wandering about my land, alone with
my own thoughts, but Rose and Lucy were for going
along the road to church, and insisted upon Ben and
myself accompanying them. Now, Ben was not quite
easy on this point, for it was the day of reading out the
banns, and he was somewhat afraid of hearing his own
name announced in such a pointed fashion amongst a
congregation that would certainly be much interested. I
was not without some dismay at the prospect myself,
and had absented myself from Divine Service for two
Sundays running on those very grounds. The girls,
however, had no fears on this point, and would hear no
objection that we could make.</p>

<p>“Not go to church indeed!” said Lucy. “Am I, then,
going to marry a heathen? What would the Vicar say
an he missed your face to-day, Master Benjamin? So
go straightways and put on your best coat and lose no
time, for I can hear the bells ringing now.”</p>

<p>“And what shall I do, and where shall I look,” said
poor Ben, “when the parson reads out our names? I
shall feel fit to drop through the floor. Everybody will
look at me. I can stand a good deal, but to have a
churchful of folk staring at me as if I were a prize
bullock is more than a man ought to stand.”</p>

<p>“Will they not stare at you to-morrow?” cried Lucy.
“Quick, I say, and make ready to go with us. Surely if
we can stand hearing the banns read out, you ought to.”</p>

<p>So away we all went, and on coming into the village
street at Darrington fell in with many of our
acquaintance, who wished us joy and happiness so heartily
that the girls blushed for pleasure, and Ben hung down his
head and looked as if he were a criminal that had been
caught in the commission of some awful deed. It was
indeed very hard on Benjamin that the girls had insisted
on his presence at church that morning, for the nave and
aisles were filled with people, and we had no sooner got
to our seats than everybody turned to look at us, so that
Ben’s face glowed like a red rose, and I felt far from
comfortable myself. Here, however, I could not but
admire the wonderful self-possession of our sweethearts,
who seemed to be wholly unconscious of the eyes turned
upon them, but gave their attention entirely to the
service, and looked as demure as cats that bask in front
of a warm fire. So the service went on until the time
came for reading out the banns of such folk as were to
be married, and then indeed I felt that every eye in the
church was upon us, and that the ploughboys in the
dark corners under the belfry were smiling and the
village girls laughing. As for me, I know not how I
looked, but I professed to be mightily interested in
Rose’s Prayer-Book, while poor Ben, after turning red
and then white, finally folded his arms and fixed his eyes
desperately on a certain corner of the roof, until Parson
Drumbleforth had made an end of our names for the
third and last time, and went forward to the next part of
the service.</p>

<p>Now, after morning prayer and sermon was over, and
Holy Communion had been celebrated with such
ceremonies as they use on Easter Day, we went out into the
churchyard, and were there joined by Jack Drumbleforth,
who brought us a message from his father to the
effect that we must dine with him at the Vicarage, which
invitation we straightway accepted. So Jack had us
into the best parlour, where the Vicar kept his books,
and his father shortly appearing in his cassock and gown
made us heartily welcome and gave us good advice upon
our future enterprises, until Mistress Deborah called us
to dinner. After the meal was over we amused ourselves
with various matters until the time for afternoon service,
when we all went to church again, Ben this time looking
as bold as brass, and carrying himself with exceeding
great dignity. And towards the end of the afternoon we
walked homewards across the fields with many good and
holy thoughts in our minds, which had been prompted
by the influences of that great day. And there was only
one regret in my heart, namely, that my dear father and
mother were not there to see our happiness, but were
lying side by side in their quiet graves in the churchyard
which we had just left.</p>

<p>So the day had passed well enough until then, and it
went better in the evening, when Rose and I went for a
long walk across our fields, and talked, as lovers will
talk, of past and present and future. We were happy
enough, and I doubt not Ben and Lucy were the same,
for they seemed on good terms with themselves when we
went back home. The girls went early to bed that
night, for there were many matters to be attended to in
the morning. Ben and I therefore were left to ourselves
by nine o’clock, and for a good half-hour we sat staring
at the fire with never a word to say.</p>

<p>“Heigho!” sighed Ben at last. “I wish it were
to-morrow! I cannot rest for thinking of it. What are
you going to do, Will? “</p>

<p>For I had risen and was going towards the door.</p>

<p>“I am going for a ride in the moonlight, Ben. ’Tis
better than sitting over the fire and hearing thee sigh
like a furnace.”</p>

<p>“Marry, and a good notion, too. Lend me a horse,
and I will go with thee.”</p>

<p>We made fast the house-door, and, going to the
stables, saddled and bridled our horses and rode away
into the meadows. The moon had risen over the woods,
and everything was filled with a silver radiance. Spring
as it was, there was yet a slight touch of frost in the
night air, and the keenness of it seemed delightful as we
put the horses to a canter and went merrily across the
land. Here and there a hare or a rabbit scudded out of
our way; now a fox was roused from his couch and
made off for the woods. Ben’s spirits rose as we dashed
along, and he laughed and sang until the woods echoed
back his voice. Presently we left the meadows, and
went into the darkness of the long wood that stretches
across country from Stapleton to Went Vale. There all
was still and silent, save when some animal, fox, badger,
or hare, broke cover and hurried away, or an owl,
perched in a dead tree, uttered its dismal note. The
trees were thick overhead, but here and there the
moon-light flickered through some opening, and fell
trembling on the bridle-path which we were traversing.</p>

<p>“Ah!” said Ben, “I am somewhat fond of my bed as a
usual thing, but this is better than sleep. Come, let us
spur up our steeds for another gallop.”</p>

<p>So away we went under the dark roof of the woods
until we had passed two miles of them and found
ourselves in the highroad that leads from Darrington
to Smeaton. We drew rein and looked round us.</p>

<p>“There is Castle Hill,” said Ben.</p>

<p>I looked at the pile of buildings rising above us to our
left. I had never set eyes on the place since the night
when Philip Lisle and I visited it in search of Dennis
and found him flown. I had desired nothing so much
as to see it and its master when I rode away from
Peterborough; nay, not even my own homestead and
those it sheltered. But now my passion was dead, for
Rupert Watson was beyond my reach. The Almighty
vengeance had descended upon him in no scant measure.</p>

<p>“They say Rupert’s madness increaseth,” said Ben.
“His nephew hath come to manage matters, and is
doubtless whole and sole master now. They say, too,
that—”</p>

<p>“My God, Ben!” I cried suddenly. “What is that?
Look—by the gate of the fold.”</p>

<p>Out of the gate right before us came a figure all in
white, leading a gray horse by the bridle. My blood
turned chill as I watched it, it looked so ghostly in the
moonlight. As we stood rooted to the spot the figure
leaped to the horse’s back and came across the paddock
in our direction.</p>

<p>“Will!” said Ben. “ ’Tis Rupert Watson! He hath
risen from his bed—see, he hath his night-clothes
on—and has come a-riding in his madness. A blind man
riding! See, ’tis the old gray horse he used to ride to
market.”</p>

<p>“And it is blind, too,” I whispered back. “It hath
been blind this two years. Ben, what shall we do? Must
we not stop him and rouse his friends?”</p>

<p>“Hush!” said Ben. “Make no sound—let us see what
he is after.”</p>

<p>We stood silent and breathless at the roadside until
that ghostly pair were close upon us. Then we saw
that it was indeed Rupert Watson, clad in his night-clothes,
with his white hair and beard falling about his
face, and his sightless eyes burning with a fierce light.
I shut my eyes and shivered, for the sight was a terrible
one—a blind man riding a blind horse!</p>

<p>He passed us at a yard’s distance, chattering and
muttering to himself and the horse. When he had got
to a little distance we turned our horses and followed
him on the soft grass. In this way we rode up the hill.
When we reached the summit we found the blind horse
and its blind, mad rider standing on the highest bit of
road, with their heads turned across the land as if they
could see. Perhaps they had been used in other days to
come there and gaze at the view. For before them in
the moonlight stretched a long, level piece of moorland,
nearly a mile across, with neither wood nor hedge to bar
their progress, and at its furthest limit a great drop of a
hundred feet over Smeaton Crag.</p>

<p>“What are they doing—they can see naught?”
whispered Ben fearfully, as we drew near.
“Hark—how he raves, Will!”</p>

<p>Rupert Watson had risen in his saddle and was shouting
and gesticulating with fierce words and motions.</p>

<p>“A last ride, good Greyfoot!” he shouted. “A last
ride together across the land. Let all the ghosts, and
the dead men, and the devils of hell follow us. On! on!”</p>

<p>He drove his spur into the blind horse’s side as he
screamed out the last word. The horse neighed, rose on
its hind feet, and then darted across the land like a mad
thing, its rider shouting and yelling.</p>

<p>“Ride, Ben, ride!” I cried, and drove both spurs into
Captain’s sides. “Ride, man! The Crag! They will
be over the Crag!”</p>

<p>Never in all my life did I ride as I rode that night in
the moonlight after the awful figures that went before,
screaming and yelling like demons of hell. The wind
flew by me and cut my face, the horse shivered and
quivered as I drove the spurs again and again into his
sides; Ben, urging his steed with voice and whip, was
left behind and out of sight in a minute. But not a
yard did we gain on the mad rider and his mad horse.
On, on, on they went like the wind. I rose in my
stirrups and shouted after them, and still they flew
forward. And then suddenly they came to the smooth,
broad surface of the Crag, and beyond it the deep
blackness of the valley, and beyond that the village of
Smeaton sleeping in the moonlight across the vale. The
awful figures in front abated nothing of their speed, but
were over the Crag like a flash of lightning and lost in
the abyss below.</p>

<p>I pulled up my own panting and suffering beast, and,
drawing near to the Crag, laid myself along the ground
and looked over. Far beneath me lay the gray horse
and its rider, and beyond them the tiny Went ran
babbling by with the moonbeams dancing on its rippling
waters.</p>

<p>Thus came Rupert Watson to his end.</p>

<h2>XLVIII</h2>

<h3>HOW THE BELLS RANG OUT AT DARRINGTON</h3>

<p>It was long past sunrise when I rose on the morning of
my wedding-day, for the excitement of the previous
night’s adventure and the task of carrying Rupert Watson
home had wearied me no little, and I had slept as
soundly as a tired dog. When I went downstairs all
was bustle and hurry in our house, for various female
acquaintances of the family had arrived and were already
busied in dressing the brides, which matter seemed
likely to be a long operation, judging from the
importance they all gave to it. As for Ben Tuckett, he
had been up and about for an hour or two, and was busy
studying his attire in the mirror when I found him, for
he had taken exceeding great pains in making himself fine.</p>

<p>“I thought thou wert going to sleep for ever,” said he,
as I came behind him. “What, man, ’tis nine o’ the
clock now, and we are to start for church at ten. Had
we not best be seeing to our horses?”</p>

<p>“Time enough for that, Ben, in an hour. As for my
horse, he will not be able to go out. Last night’s work
took too much out of him for that.”</p>

<p>“Alack!” said Ben. “I have been dreaming of it all
night. Never again shall we see such a sight as that.
’Twas no pleasant matter to be engaged in on the eve of
a man’s wedding.”</p>

<p>“Have you told the girls of it?” I inquired.</p>

<p>“Yea, they and I were down here eating our breakfast
by seven o’clock and I told them the whole story,”
answered Ben. “I feared lest they should hear of it
elsewhere. All the guests will be full of it, thou wilt
see, when they come hither.”</p>

<p>Then he fell to work smoothing his fine coat and
arranging and rearranging his neckcloth, and staring at
himself in the mirror, so I left him and went to see that
all things were in order for the marriage-feast, which
was to be held when we came back from church. Now,
we had no room in the house large enough for this, and
we had therefore had one of the granaries swept and
garnished for the occasion, and there the maids were
laying out the feast under the orders of Mistress Deborah,
who had come over to give us the benefit of her
experience for that day. From the granary I went to the
stables, where I found Jacob Trusty, who was busied
in decorating all the horses with gay-coloured ribbons.
Jacob himself was very fine, for he had gotten himself
new garments from the tailor, and wore a hat with a
great plume in it, which was extravagance I never knew
him guilty of before. Now, I no sooner appeared at the
stable door than Jacob seized me by the hand and
greeted me warmly, and gave me his fervent blessing,
with a wish that I might live long and happily and see
my children’s children around me. No more earnest
wish had I that day than this of Jacob’s, for he meant
every word of it.</p>

<p>“ ’Tis a great day this, lad,” said Jacob, still busied
with his ribbons. “I could die happy now that thou art
taking thyself a wife. However, let me see thy son
before I die. Then shall I have known four generations
of Dales. Only one regret have I this day, lad,
namely, that thy father and thy mother are not alive to
see it.”</p>

<p>“That is all that troubles me, Jacob.”</p>

<p>“We cannot have all we would in this world,” said he.
“I doubt not they are better off where they are, lad.
Master Benjamin hath been telling me of what ye were
at last night. Did I not tell thee, William, long ago,
that thy father’s murderers would reap the fruit of their
misdeeds? Thou seest how it hath come about. When
I spoke our house was full of woe and death; to-day it
is full of joy and life, and Rupert Watson lieth yonder
dead, and there is none left of his name. He and his
have received ample reward for their sins.”</p>

<p>There was yet another task I had before me ere I
returned to the house to receive the guests, who were
already arriving. I took a spade and went to the corner
of the garden where, many a year before, I had buried
the little box containing Philip Lisle’s guinea and the
primrose which Rose had given me at my first parting
from her. I soon brought the box to light, and opened
it and took out the guinea and the flowers, which,
because the box was of lead and air-tight, were still
preserved. There was the primrose which she had given
me down in Went Vale, and with it the rose she added
to it years after. Faded as they were, I pinned them
carefully in my coat, and so went back to the house to
look for Ben.</p>

<p>By that time there had already arrived a considerable
number of our guests, who were all very gaily attired,
and had decorated their horses with ribbons. Now, too,
came Jack Drumbleforth, who immediately constituted
himself master of the ceremonies, and set to work to
marshal everybody into his or her proper place. By the
time I had gone round and shaken hands with everybody
it was ten o’clock, and time to set out for the church.
Then came the brides from their chamber, and all the
women ran to see them in the parlour, and Ben and I
wanted to see them too, but were prevented by Jack, who
vowed that we should not set eyes upon them until they
joined us at the altar. So we were forced to be content,
and went out to our horses with our friends, and were
duly arranged in a grand procession by Jack and Tom
Thorpe. First of all rode twelve young farmers, my
friends, whose horses were gaily decorated with ribbons
and flowers; then came Ben and myself; after us
followed several other of our friends, all similarly
mounted and decorated, and after them rode Jack
Drumbleforth and Tom Thorpe, escorting the brides,
who rode on pillions behind them, and these were
followed by four young gentlemen, escorting four young
ladies, who were to act as maids to Rose and Lucy;
and winding up the procession came Jacob Trusty and
Timothy Grass, mounted on my two best cart-horses,
and carrying great boughs of green stuff, so that the
whole affair was quite magnificent, and delighted Ben so
greatly that he sat his horse like an emperor.</p>

<p>Now, when we got into the village street at Darrington,
we found that the folks there had been very busy
since early morning, and had prepared us such a
welcome as showed that they wished us well. For
there was a great arch of green stuff across the
high-road at the inn, and another at the entrance to the
churchyard, and the church porch was gay with flowers.
Here there was a great concourse of people gathered
together, and we were saluted with right hearty cheers
as we left our horses and walked into the church, where
Parson Drumbleforth waited, book in hand, to receive
us in the presence of a congregation which filled every
corner. So Ben and I took up our places, and our friends
stood round us, and presently appeared Jack and Tom
leading the brides, and the Vicar began the solemn
service that was to make us one for life. And when
he came to that part where it is necessary that someone
should give the woman to the man, I stayed him and
beckoned Jacob Trusty to come forward, and it was
Jacob’s hand that put my wife’s in mine. So the service
went on, and presently the last words were said, and we
went out into the sunlight with the bells clashing and
clanging joyously from the old tower above.</p>

<p>Now, we had no sooner emerged from the porch with
our wives than we were surrounded by the crowd and
greeted with such warmth as deeply touched us. Then
Ben and I threw away all our small money for the
children to scramble for, and sent more to the ringers
in the belfry, so that they might refresh themselves and
ring their merriest. And all this done, we mounted our
horses and reformed our procession to return home, but
now our wives rode at the head with us, and Parson
Drumbleforth, very fine in his best cap and cassock and
silver-buckled shoes, rode at our side on his white mare.
So we returned to Dale’s Field and were greeted with
much affection by those who had remained behind, and
I lifted Rose from my horse and took her across
the threshold for the first time as mistress of my
house.</p>

<p>Then followed the wedding-feast, whereat almost
every friend we had was present, and the tables were
crowded. Whether Ben or I felt most proud I know
not, but he did often say in after-years that I looked as
if I had conquered a city and won a rich treasure—as
indeed I had. As for him, he plucked up his courage
wonderfully now that the ordeal was over, and laughed
and joked with everyone, and made a speech that caused
everybody to laugh exceedingly. We had plenty of
speech-making indeed, for the Vicar had some grave
remarks to make, and Jack some humorous ones, and
old Jacob, whom I had caused to sit near me in an
honoured place, addressed a few words to us, and there
were toasts proposed and spoken to until everybody’s
health had been drunk. But there was one toast drunk
in solemn silence and received with sad feelings by all
of us, and that was to the memory of my dear father
and mother and of Philip Lisle.</p>

<p>When the feast was over nothing would content Jack
but a dance, and very soon he had sent for the fiddler
and was arranging matters for country dances on the
lawn before the house. So all the young folks danced
and the old ones sat round the garden and watched
them, and whenever the fiddler stopped playing we
heard the joyous jangle of the bells ringing out across
the fields. So the afternoon wore away to evening, and
at last the shadows fell across garden and meadow, and
our guests prepared to depart. And first of all Ben
saddled his horse and made ready the pillion, and
brought forth his wife, between whom and Rose there
was much embracing, and they, too, rode away, with
half a dozen cavaliers to escort them to Master Ben’s
house at Pontefract. Then followed the others, in twos
and threes and fours, their laughter ringing out happily
along the highway. And last of all went Jack and his
father, with many a wish for our happiness, and many
a pressure of our hands, and we stood at the garden-gate, listening to the dying away of their horses’ feet in
the distance, and to the last merry peal of the bells in
the church tower.</p>

<p>The last sound died away, the bells ceased with a final
note of triumph; the twilight deepened, and the moon
rose above the dark woods. We stood for a moment
and looked across the familiar fields; then, hand in
hand, we went into our house and closed the door and
left the land sleeping in the moonlight.</p>

<hr/>

<p>And now if I had my own way I would add nothing
more to this history, because in all such matters that I
have read there was no more written after the marriage
of the folks most concerned. But my daughter Dorothy,
who knows more of these things than I, insists that we
must add somewhat to our narrative, because those who
read it will want to know what became of all the people
we have mentioned. Wherefore I must set down some
particulars of them, according to her desire. Certainly I
cannot say all that I might, because it is now near forty
years since I was married to my dear wife, and in that
time there have been all manner of things happen to me
and my friends. But some particulars I can give, and
will now proceed with my task.</p>

<p>And first as to Ben and Lucy. It was commonly said
that there were no people in all England who were so
exactly suited to each other as these two, for they
seemed to understand each other to the smallest degree,
and never had contrary thoughts on any matter. What
Lucy liked Ben liked; what Ben wanted Lucy was sure
to want. So they walked the path of life, each thinking
the other to be well-nigh perfect. They had no less than
twelve children—five boys and seven girls—all of whom
lived. Ben grew stout and rosy, and got prouder every
time Lucy presented him with a new infant. He did
well in his business and made money. Then he became
a Councillor, and afterwards an Alderman. And in due
time matters so prospered with him that they made him
Mayor of his native town, and a prouder man I never
saw than he was on the day of his election. He
continued to grow stouter and rosier, and of more
importance, until he died at the age of sixty, leaving
Lucy to mourn him with sincere affection, which she did for
nearly ten years, when she went to join him in a better
world.</p>

<p>As for Parson Drumbleforth, he lived many years
after my wedding, and remained hale and hearty to the
very end. Until the last week of his life he was used to
come out to Dale’s Field now and then and talk with us
of the old bygone days. He was invariably accompanied
by Jack, who had remained at home studying with his
father, and who was, as the Vicar said, very comforting
to his declining years. Now, upon the Easter Sunday
of 1658 the Vicar had celebrated the Holy Communion
in his parish church, and had kneeled down to make his
thanksgiving, at which devotion he was so long engaged
that Jack went to his side and touched him, only to find
that the good old man was dead and had gone to finish
his prayers in heaven. So then there came another
Vicar to Darrington, and Jack said farewell to us and
rode away to London. It was many years before I saw
him again, and then he stayed two nights at Dale’s
Field on his way north, and told us that he was now
become a clergyman and was going to a living in the
North Riding. Likewise he had printed a little book of
verses which had gained him some fame, and he gave a
copy to Rose. So he went to his living and now abideth
there, being an old man and a faithful minister, and
amuseth himself with his garden and his verse-making,
having never married.</p>

<p>Jacob Trusty, who was as true and loyal a friend as
ever man had, lived until he was eighty-five years of
age, and when he died we wept his loss as sincerely as
if he had been a very near relation. For years before
he died he did no work, but sat in his armchair by the
fireside in our great kitchen. When my first boy was
born, which was about a year after our marriage, Jacob’s
delight knew no bounds, and from that moment he gave
over attending the cows and took to the chimney-corner,
so that he might watch the baby. He would sit there
and rock the cradle for hours, and for the boy’s sake he
recalled many an old song, and sang it in his cracked
voice as the lad sat on his knee. He saw more children
of mine before he died, but it was my eldest son, William,
that he worshipped, and the boy’s hand held his when
he died. I think that in him Jacob used to see me, for
I often found them talking as Jacob and I had talked in
the old days. It was a beautiful spring evening when
Jacob died, and he had just said to me that though he
had seen a good deal, he had never set eyes on aught
so fair as our own acres. Then he laid his head back
on the pillow, and holding my boy’s little hand in his
own for they had carried the lad up to say
“Good-night”—he fell asleep, to wake in another world.
And in him I lost one who had loved me and mine with a
love which no words can do justice to.</p>

<p>And now for myself and my dear, dear wife, whom
truly I believe to have grown in every grace and virtue
as the years have gone by. We have had six children,
three boys and as many girls, and so far God hath taken
none of them from us. In all our married life there has
been no cloud, for we have been so happy in our love
that nothing has seemed powerful enough to touch us.
The years have come and gone, and every day she has
grown dearer, and, as I think, more beautiful. It is
true that she is now old, and that her once dark hair is
gray; but to me who have loved her since she was a child,
she has never changed. As I write these last words she
is walking in the orchard with my eldest daughter, who
is the very image of what her mother was many a year
ago, and as I watch her my heart thanks God for His
mercy in having given me so good and gentle a companion
throughout my life. Truly, indeed, I have been
favoured not a little. I have had good friends, and
loving friends, and there has been more of sunshine than
of storm in my life. I have seen my children grow up
around me, and at this moment I can hear the voices of
my grandchildren playing under the apple-trees in my
orchard. So let me bring this story of my life to an end
by thanking God for all that He has done for me and
mine, and above all for the true and gentle love that has
been my guiding-star from first to last, that has made
this world a heaven to me, and has never ceased to point
my heart to all that is good, and holy, and eternal.</p>
